saw you look so well before. Yes-i'll tell
you when you looked like it -- that night, a year and a
half ago, when you came in so wildiike, and scolded us
for making remarks about you and Mr. Troy.'
"Everybody will think that I am setting myself to
captivate Mr. Boldwood, I suppose,' she murmured.
"At least they'll say so. Can't my hair be brushed
down a little flatter? I dread going -- yet I dread the
risk of wounding him by staying away.'
"Anyhow, ma'am, you can't well be dressed plainer
than you are, unless you go in sackcloth at once. 'Tis
your excitement is what makes you look so noticeable
to-night.'
"I don't know what's the matter, I feel wretched at
one time, and buoyant at another. I wish I could have
continued quite alone as I have been for the last year
or so, with no hopes and no fears, and no pleasure and
no grief.
"Now just suppose Mr. Boldwood should ask you
 -- only just suppose it -- to run away with him, what
would you do, ma'am?'
"Liddy -- none of that,' said Bathsheba, gravely.
"Mind, I won't hear joking on any such matter. Do
you hear?'
"I beg pardon, ma'am. But knowing what rum
things we women be, I just said -- however, I won't
speak of it again.'
"No marrying for me yet for many a year; if ever,
'twill be for reasons very, very different from those you
think, or others will believe! Now get my cloak, for it
is time to go.'
                        VI
"Oak, said Boldwood, "before you go I want to
mention what has been passing in my mind lately --
that little arrangement we made about your share in the
farm I mean. That share is small, too small, consider+
ing how little I attend to business now, and how much
time and thought you give to it. Well,
<P 425>
since the world
is brightening for me, I want to show my sense of it
by increasing yopur proportion in the partnership. I'll
make a memorandum of the arrangement which struck
me as likely to be convenient, for I haven't time to talk
about it now; and then we'll discuss it at our leisure.
My intention is ultimately to retire from the manage+
ment altogether, and until you can take all the expendi+
ture upon your shoulders, I'll be a sleeping partner in
the stock. Then, if I marry her -- and I hope-i feel I
shall, why --  -- '
"Pray don't speak of it, sir,' said Oak, hastily. "We
don't know what may happen. So many upsets may
befall 'ee. There's many a slip, as they say -- and I
would advise you-i know you'll pardon me this once --
not to be <1too sure>1.'
"I know, I know. But the feeling I have about in+
creasing your share is on account of what I know of you
Oak, I have learnt a little about your secret: your
interest in her is more than that of bailiff for an em+
ployer. But you have behaved like a man, and I, as a
sort of successful rivai-successful partly through your
goodness of heart -- should like definitely to show my
sense of your friendship under what must have been a
great pain to you.'
"O that's not necessary, thank 'ee,' said Oak,
hurriedly. "I must get used to such as that; other
men have, and so shall I.'
Oak then left him. He was uneasy on Boldwood's
account, for he saw anew that this constant passion
of the farmer made him not the man he once had
been.
As Boldwood continued awhile in his room alone --
ready and dressed to receive his company -- the mood of
anxiety about his appearance seemed to pass away, and
to be succeeded by a deep solemnity. He looked out
of the window, and regarded the dim outline of the trees
upon the sky, and the twilight deepening to darkness.
Then he went to a locked closet, and took from
a locked drawer therein a small circular case the size of
a pilibox, and was about to put it into his pocket. But
he lingered to open the cover and take a momentary
glance inside. It contained a woman's finger-ring, set
all the way round with small
<P 426>
diamonds, and from its
appearance had evidently been recently purchased.
Boldwood's eyes dwelt upon its many sparkles a long
time, though that its material aspect concerned him
little was plain from his manner and mien, which were
those of a mind following out the presumed thread of
that jewel's future history.
The noise of wheels at the front of the house became
audible. Boldwood closed the box, stowed it away
carefully in his pocket, and went out upon the landing.
The old man who was his indoor factotum came at the
same moment to the foot of the stairs.
"They be coming, sir-iots of 'em -- a-foot and a+
driving!'
"I was coming down this moment. Those wheels I
heard -- is it Mrs. Troy?'
"No, sir -- 'tis not she yet.'
A reserved and sombre expression had returned to
Boldwood's face again, but it poorly cloaked his feei
ings when he pronounced Bathsheba's name; and his
feverish anxiety continued to show its existence by a
galloping motion of his fingers upon the side of his thigh
as he went down the stairs.
                   VII
"How does this cover me?' said Troy to Pennyways,
"Nobody would recognize me now, I'm sure.'
He was buttoning on a heavy grey overcoat of
Noachian cut, with cape and high collar, the latter being
erect and rigid, like a girdling wall, and nearly reaching
to the verge of travelling cap which was pulled down
over his ears.
Pennyways snuffed the candle, and then looked up
and deliberately inspected Troy
"You've made up your mind to go then?' he
said.
"Made up my mind? Yes; of course I have.'
"Why not write to her? 'Tis a very queer corner
that you have got into, sergeant. You see all these things
will come to light if you go back, and they won't sound
well at all. Faith, if I was you I'd even bide as you be
 -- a single man of the name of Francis. A good wife is
good, but the best wife is not so good
<P 427>
as no wife at all.
Now that's my outspoke mind, and I've been called a
long-headed feller here and there.'
"All nonsense!' said Troy, angrily. "There she is
with plenty of money, and a house and farm, and
horses, and comfort, and here am I living from hand to
mouth -- a needy adventurer. Besides, it is no use
talking now; it is too late, and I am glad of it ; I've been
seen and recognized here this very afternoon. I should
have gone back to her the day after the fair, if it hadn't
been for you talking about the law, and rubbish about
getting a separation; and I don't put it off any longer.
What the deuce put it into my head to run away at all,
I can't think! Humbugging sentiment -- that's what it
was. But what man on earth was to know that his wife
would be in such a hurry to get rid of his name!'
"I should have known it. She's bad enough for
anything.'
"Pennyways, mind who you are talking to.'
"Well, sergeant, all I say is this, that if I were you I'd
go abroad again where I came from -- 'tisn't too late to do
it now. I wouldn't stir up the business and get a bad
name for the sake of living with her -- for all that about
your play-acting is sure to come out, you know, although
you think otherwise. My eyes and limbs, there'll be a
racket if you go back just now -- in the middle of Bold+
wood's Christmasing!'
"H'm, yes. I expect I shall not be a very welcome
guest if he has her there,' said the sergeant, with a slight
laugh. "A sort of Alonzo the Brave; and when I go in
the guests will sit in silence and fear, and all laughter
and pleasure will be hushed, and the lights in the
chamber burn blue, and the worms -- Ugh, horrible! --
Ring for some more brandy, Pennyways, I felt an
awful shudder just then! Well, what is there besides?
A stick-i must have a walking-stick.'
Pennyways now felt himself to be in something of a
difficulty, for should Bathsheba and Troy become recon+
ciled it would be necessary to regain her good opinion
if he would secure the patronage of her husband. I
sometimes think she likes you yet, and is a good woman
at bottom,' he said, as a saving sentence. "But there's
no telling to a certainty from a body's outside. Well,
<P 428>
you'll do as you like about going, of course, sergeant,
and as for me, I'll do as you tell me.'
"Now, let me see what the time is,' said Troy, after
emptying his glass in one draught as he stood. 'Half+
past six o'clock. I shall not hurry along the road, and
shall be there then before nine.'
CONCURRITUR
<C liii>
<P 429>
CONCURRITUR -- HORAE MOMENTO
OUTSIDE the front of Boldwood's house a group of
men stood in the dark, with their faces towards the door,
which occasionally opened and closed for the passage of
some guest or servant, when a golden rod of light would
stripe the ground for the moment and vanish again,
leaving nothing outside but the glowworm shine of the
pale lamp amid the evergreens over the door.
"He was seen in Casterbridge this afternoon -- so the
boy said,' one of them remarked in a whisper. "And l
for one believe it. His body was never found, you know.'
"'Tis a strange story,' said the next. "You may
depend upon't that she knows nothing about it.'
"Not a word.'
"Perhaps he don't mean that she shall,' said another
man.
"If he's alive and here in the neighbourhood, he
means mischief,' said the first. "Poor young thing:
I do pity her, if 'tis true. He'll drag her to the dogs.'
"O no; he'll settle down quiet enough,' said one
disposed to take a more hopeful view of the case.
"What a fool she must have been ever to have had
anything to do with the man! She is so self-willed and
independent too, that one is more minded to say it
serves her right than pity her.'
"No, no. I don't hold with 'ee there. She was no
otherwise than a girl mind, and how couid she tell what
the man was made of? If 'tis really true, 'tis too hard
a punishment, and more than she ought to hae. -- Hullo,
who's that?' This was to some footsteps that were
heard approaching.
"William Smallbury,' said a dim figure in the shades,
coming up and joining them. 'Dark as a hedge, to+
night, isn't it? I all but missed the plank over the river
ath'art there in the bottom --
<P 430>
never did such a thing
before in my life. Be ye any of Boldwood's workfolk?'
He peered into their faces.
"Yes -- all o' us. We met here a few minutes ago.'
"Oh, I hear now -- that's Sam Samway : thought I
knowed the voice, too. Going in?'
"Presently. But I say, William,' Samway whispered,
"have ye heard this strange tale?'
"What -- that about Sergeant Troy being seen, d'ye
mean, souls?' said Smallbury, also lowering his voice.
"Ay: in Casterbridge.'
"Yes, I have. Laban Tall named a hint of it to me
but now -- but I don't think it. Hark, here Laban
comes himself, 'a b'lieve.' A footstep drew near.
"Laban?'
"Yes, 'tis I,' said Tall.
"Have ye heard any more about that?'
"No,' said Tall, joining the group. "And I'm in+
clined to think we'd better keep quiet. If so be 'tis not
true, 'twill flurry her, and do her much harm to repeat
it; and if so be 'tis true, 'twill do no good to forestall
her time o' trouble. God send that it mid be a lie, for
though Henery Fray and some of 'em do speak against
her, she's never been anything but fair to me. She's
hot and hasty, but she's a brave girl who'll never tell a
lie however much the truth may harm her, and I've no
cause to wish her evil.'
"She never do tell women's little lies, that's true ; and
'tis a thing that can be said of very few. Ay, all the
harm she thinks she says to yer face: there's nothing
underhand wi' her.'
They stood silent then, every man busied with his
own thoughts, during which interval sounds of merri+
ment could be heard within. Then the front door again
opened, the rays streamed out, the weliknown form of
Boldwood was seen in the rectangular area of light, the
door closed, and Boldwood walked slowly down the path.
"'Tis master,' one of the men whispered, as he neared
them. "We'd better stand quiet -- he'll go in again
directly. He would think it unseemly o' us to be
loitering here.
Boldwood came on, and passed by the men without
<P 431>
seeing them, they being under the bushes on the grass.
He paused, leant over the gate, and breathed a long
breath. They heard low words come from him.
"I hope to God she'll come, or this night will be
nothing but misery to me! O my darling, my darling,
why do you keep me in suspense like this?'
He said this to himself, and they all distinctly heard
it. Boldwood remained silent after that, and the noise
from indoors was again just audible, until, a few minutes
later, light wheels could be distinguished coming down
the hill. They drew nearer, and ceased at the gate.
Boldwood hastened back to the door, and opened it;
and the light shone upon Bathsheba coming up the
path.
Boldwood compressed his emotion to mere welcome:
the men marked her light laugh and apology as she met
him: he took her into the house; and the door closed
again.
"Gracious heaven, I didn't know it was like that with
him!' said one of the men. "I thought that fancy of
his was over long ago.
"You don't know much of master, if you thought
that,' said Samway.
"I wouldn't he should know we heard what 'a said
for the world,' remarked a third.
"I wish we had told of the report at once,' the first
uneasily continued. "More harm may come of this than
we know of. Poor Mr. Boldwood, it will, be hard upon
en. I wish Troy was in  --  --  Well, God forgive me
for such a wish! A scoundrel to play a poor wife such
tricks. Nothing has prospered in Weatherbury since he
came here. And now I've no heart to go in. Let's
look into Warren's for a few minutes first, shall us,
neighbours?'
Samway, Tall, and Smallbury agreed to go to Warren's,
and went out at the gate, the remaining ones entering
the house. The three soon drew near the malt-house,
approaching it from the adjoining orchard, and not by
way of the street. The pane of glass was illuminated
as usual. Smallbury was a little in advance of the rest
when, pausing, he turned suddenly to his companions
and said, "Hist! See there.'
<P 432>
The light from the pane was now perceived to be
shining not upon the ivied wall as usual, but upon some
object close to the glass. It was a human face.
"Let's come closer,' whispered Samway; and they
approached on tiptoe. There was no disbelieving the
report any longer. Troy's face was almost close to the
pane, and he was looking in. Not only was he looking in,
but he appeared to have been arrested by a conversation
which was in progress in the malt-house, the voices of
the interlocutors being those of Oak and the maltster.
"The spree is all in her honour, isn't it -- hey?' said
the old man. "Although he made believe 'tis only
keeping up o' Christmas?'
"I cannot say,' replied Oak.
"O 'tis true enough, faith. I cannot understand
Farmer Boldwood being such a fool at his time of life
as to ho and hanker after thik woman in the way 'a do,
and she not care a bit about en.'
The men, after recognizing Troy's features, withdrew
across the orchard as quietly as they had come. The
air was big with Bathsheba's fortunes to-night : every
word everywhere concerned her. When they were quite
out of earshot all by one instinct paused.
"It gave me quite a turn -- his face,' said Tall,
breathing.
"And so it did me,' said Samway. "What's to be
done?'
"I don't see that 'tis any busincss of ours,' Smallbury
murmured dubiously.
"But it is! 'Tis a thing which is everybody's business,
said Samway. "We know very well that master's on a
wrong tack, and that she's quite in the dark, and we
should let 'em know at once. Laban, you know her
best -- you'd better go and ask to speak to her.'
"I bain't fit for any such thing,' said Laban, nervously.
"I should think William ought to do it if anybody. He's
oldest.'
"I shall have nothing to do with it,' said Smallbury.
"'Tis a ticklish business altogether. Why, he'll go on
to her himself in a few minutes, ye'll see.'
"We don't know that he will. Come, Laban.'
<P 433>
"Very well, if I must I must, I suppose,' Tall reluct+
antly answered. "What must I say?'
"Just ask to see master.'
"O no; I shan't speak to Mr. Boldwood. If I tell
anybody, 'twill be mistress.'
"Very well,' said Samway.
Laban then went to the door. When he opened it
the hum of bustle rolled out as a wave upon a still
strand -- the assemblage being immediately inside the
hali-and was deadened to a murmur as he closed it
again. Each man waited intently, and looked around at
the dark tree tops gently rocking against the sky and
occasionally shivering in a slight wind, as if he took
interest in the scene, which neither did. One of them
began walking up and down, and then came to where
he started from and stopped again, with a sense that
walking was thing not worth doing now.
"I should think Laban must have seen mistress by
this time,' said Smallbury, breaking the silence. "Per+
haps she won't come and speak to him.'
The door opened. Tall appeared, and joined them
"Well?' said both.
"I didn't like to ask for her after all,' Laban faltered
out. "They were all in such a stir, trying to put a little
spirit into the party. Somehow the fun seems to hang
fire, though everything's there that a heart can desire,
and I couldn't for my soul interfere and throw damp
upon it -- if 'twas to save my life, I couldn't!'
"I suppose we had better all go in together,' said
Samway, gloomily. "Perhaps I may have a chance of
saying a word to master.'
So the men entered the hall, which was the room
sellected and arranged for the gathering because of its
size. The younger men and maids were at last just
beginning to dance. Bathshesba had been perplexed
how to act, for she was not much more than a slim
young maid herself, and the weight of stateliness sat
heavy upon her. Sometimes she thought she ought
not to have come under any circumstances; then she
considered what cold unkindness that would have been,
and finally resolved
<P 434>
upon the middle course of staying
for about an hour only, and gliding off unobserved,
having from the first made up her mind that she could
on no account dance, sing, or take any active part in
the proceedings.
Her allotted hour having been passed in chatting
and looking on, Bathsheba told Liddy not to hurry her+
self, and went to the small parlour to prepare for
departure, which, like the hall, was decorated with holly
and ivy, and well lighted up.
Nobody was in the room, but she had hardly
HORAE MOMENTO
been there a moment when the master of the house
entered.
"Mrs. Troy -- you are not going?' he said. "We've
hardly begun!'
"If you'll excuse me, I should like to go now.' Her
manner was restive, for she remembered her promise,
and imagined what he was about to say. "But as it is
not late,' she added, "I can walk home, and leave my
man and Liddy to come when they choose.'
"I've been trying to get an opportunity of speaking
to you,' said Boldwood. "You know perhaps what I
long to say?'
Bathsheba silently looked on the floor.
"You do give it?' he said, eagerly.
"What?' she whispered.
"Now, that's evasion! Why, the promise. I don't
want to intrude upon you at all, or to let it become
known to anybody. But do give your word! A
mere business compact, you know, between two people
who are beyond the influence of passicn.' Boldwood
knew how false this picture was as regarded himself;
but he had proved that it was the only tone in which
she would allow him to approach her. "A promise to
marry me at the end of five years and three-quarters.
You owe it to me!'
"I feel that I do,' said Bathsheba ; "that is, if you
demand it. But I am a changed woman -- an unhappy
woman -- and not -- not --  -- "
" You are still a very beautiful woman, said Boldwood.
Honesty and pure conviction suggested the remark,
unaccompanied by any perception that it might have
been adopted by blunt flattery to soothe and win her.
However, it had not much effect now, for for she said,
in a
<P 435>
passionless murmur which was in itself a proof of
her words: "I have no feeling in the matter at all.
And I don't at all know what is right to do in my
diddicult Position, and I have nobody to advise me. But
I give my promise, if I must. I give it as the rendering of
a debt, conditionally, of course, on my being a widow.'
"You'll marry me between five and six years hence ? '
"Don't press me too hard. I'll marry nobody
else.'
" But surely you will name the time, or there's nothing
in the promise at all?'
"O, I don't know, pray let me go!' she said, her
bosom beginning to rise. "I am afraid what to do.!
want to be just to you, and to be that seems to be wrong+
ing myself, and perhaps it is breaking the commandments.
There is considerable doubt of his death, and then it
is dreadful; let me ask a solicitor, Mr. Boldwood, if I
ought or no!'
"Say the words, dear one, and the subject shall be
dismissed ; a blissrul loving intimacy of six years, and
then marriage -- O Bathsheba, say them!' he begged in
a husky voice, unable to sustain the forms of mere
friendship any longer. "Promise yourself to me; I
deserve it, indeed I do, for I have loved you more than
anybody in the world! And if I said hasty words and
showed uncalled-for heat of manner towards you, believe
me, dear, I did not mean to distress you ; I was in
agony, Bathsheba, and I did not know what I said.
You wouldn't let a dog suffer what I have suffered,
could you but know it! Sometimes I shrink from your
knowing what I have felt for you, and sometimes I am
distressed that all of it you never will know. Be
gracious, and give up a little to me, when I would give
up mylife for you!'
The trimmings of her dress, as they quivered against
the light, showed how agitated she was, and at last she
burst out crying. 'And you'll not -- press me -- about
anything more -- if I say in five or six years?' she
sobbed, when she had power to frame the words.
"Yes, then I'll leave it to time.'
"Very well. If he does not return, I'll marry you
in six years from this day, if we both live,' she said
solemnly.
<P 436>
"And you'll take this as a token from me.'
Boldwood had come close to her side, and now he
clasped one of her hands in both his own, and lifted it
to his breast.
"What is it? Oh I cannot wear a ring!' she ex+
claimed, on seeing what he held; "besides, I wouldn't
have a soul know that it's an engagement! Perhaps it
is improper? Besides, we are not engaged in the usual
sense, are we ? Don't insist, Mr. Boldwood -- don't!'
In her trouble at not being able to get her hand away
from him at once, she stamped passionately on the floor
with one foot, and tears crowded to her eyes again.
"It means simply a pledge -- no sentiment -- the seal
of a practical compact,' he said more quictly, but still
retaining her hand in his firm grasp. "Come, now!'
And Boldwood slipped the ring on her finger.
"I cannot wear it,' she said, weeping as if her heart
would break. " You frighten me, almost. So wild a
scheme! Please let me go home!'
" Only to-night : wear it just to-night, to please me!.'
Bathsheba sat down in a chair, and buried her face
in her handkerchief, though Boldwood kept her hand
yet. At length she said, in a sort of hopeless whisper --
"Very well, then, I will to-night, if you wish it so
earnestly. Now loosen my hand; I will, indeed I will
wear it to-night.'
"And it shall be the beginning of a pleasant secret
courtship of six years, with a wedding at the end?'
"It must be, I suppose, since you will have it so!'
she said, fairly beaten into non-resistance.
Boldwood pressed her hand, and allowed it to drop
in her lap. "I am happy now,' he said. "God bless
you!'
He left the room, and when he thought she might
be sufficiently composed sent one of the maids to her
Bathsheba cloaked the effects of the late scene as she
best could, followed the girl, and in a few moments
came downstairs with her hat and cloak on, ready to go.
To get to the door it was necessary to pass through the
hall, and before doing so she paused on the bottom of
the staircase which descended into one corner, to take
a last look at the gathering.
There was no music or dancing in progress just now.
At the
<P 437>
lower end, which had been arranged for the work+
folk specially, a group conversed in whispers, and with
clouded looks. Boldwood was standing by the fireplace,
and he, too, though so absorbed in visions arising from
her promise that he scarcely saw anything, seemed at
that moment to have observed their peculiar manner,
and their looks askance.
"What is it you are in doubt about, men?' he said.
One of them turned and replied uneasily: 'It was
something Laban heard of, that's all, sir.'
"News? Anybody married or engaged, born or
dead?' inquired the farmer, gaily. "Tell it to us, Tall.
One would think from your looks and mysterious ways
that it was something very dreadful indeed.'
"O no, sir, nobody is dead,' said Tall.
"I wish somebody was,' said Samway, in a whisper.
"What do you say, Samway?' asked Boldwood, some+
what sharply. "If you have anything to say, speak out;
if not, get up another dance.'
"Mrs. Troy has come downstairs,' said Samway to
Tall. "If you want to tell her, you had better do it now.'
"Do you know what they mean?' the farmer asked
Bathsheba, across the room.
"I don't in the least," said Bathsheba.
There was a smart rapping at the door. One of
the men opened it instantly, and went outside.
"Mrs. Troy is wanted,' he said, on returning.
"Quite ready,' said Bathsheba. "Though I didn't
tell them to send.'
"It is a stranger, ma'am,' said the man by the door.
"A stranger?' she said.
"Ask him to come in,' said Boldwood.
The message was given, and Troy, wrapped up to
his eyes as we have seen him, stood in the doorway.
There was an unearthly silence, all looking towards
the newcomer. Those who had just learnt that he
was in the neighbourhood recognized him instantly;
those who did not were perplexed. Nobody noted
Bathsheba. She was leaning on the stairs. Her brow
had heavily contracted; her whole face was
<P 438>
pallid, her
lips apart, her eyes rigidly staring at their visitor.
Boldwood was among those who did not notice that
he was Troy. "Come in, come in!' he repeated,
cheerfully, "and drain a Christmas beaker with us,
stranger!'
Troy next advanced into the middle of the room,
took off his cap, turned down his coat-collar, and looked
Boldwood in the face. Even then Boldwood did not
recognize that the impersonator of Heaven's persistent
irony towards him, who had once before broken in
upon his bliss, scourged him, and snatched his delight
away, had come to do these things a second time.
Troy began to laugh a mechanical laugh: Boldwood
recognized him now.
Troy turned to Bathsheba. The poor girl's wretched+
ness at this time was beyond all fancy or narration.
She had sunk down on the lowest stair; and there
she sat, her mouth blue and dry, and her dark eyes
fixed vacantly upon him, as if she wondered whether it
were not all a terrible illusion.
Then Troy spoke. "Bathsheba, I come here for
you!'
She made no reply.
" Come home with me: come!
Bathsheba moved her feet a little, but did not rise.
Troy went across to her.
"come, madam, do you hear what I say?' he said,
peremptorily.
A strange voice came from the fireplace -- a voice
sounding far off and confined, as if from a dungeon.
Hardly a soul in the assembly recognized the thin tones
to be those of Boldwood. Sudden dispaire had trans+
formed him.
"Bathsheba, go with your husband!'
Nevertheless, she did not move. The truth was
that Bathsheba was beyond the pale of activity -- and
yet not in a swoon. She was in a state of mental <1gutta>1
<1serena>1; her mind was for the minute totally deprived of
light at the same time no obscuration was apparent
from without.
Troy stretched out his hand to pull her her towards him,
when she quickly shrank back. This visible dread of
him seemed to irritate Troy, and he seized her arm and
pulled it sharply.
<P 439>
Whether his grasp pinched her, or
whether his mere touch was the ccause, was never known,
but at the moment of his seizure she writhed, and gave
a quick, low scream.
The scream had been heard but a few seconds When
it was followed by sudden deafening report that
echoed through the room and stupefied them all. The
oak partition shook with the concussion, and the place
was filled with grey smoke.
In bewilderment they turned their eyes to Boldwood.
at his back, as stood before the fireplace, was a gun+
rack, as is usual in farmhouses, constructed to hold two
guns. When Bathsheba had cried out in her husband's
grasp, Boldwood's face of gnashing despair had changed.
The veins had swollen, and a frenzied look had gleamed
in his eye. He had turned quickly, taken one of the
guns, cocked it, and at once discharged it at Troy.
Troy fell. The distance apart of the two men was
so small that the charge of shot did not spread in the
least, but passed like a bullet into his body. He uttered
a long guttural sigh -- there was a contraction -- an exten+
sion -- then his muscles relaxed, and he lay still.
Boldwood was seen through the smoke to be now
again engaged with the gun. It was double-barrelled,
and he had, meanwhile, in some way fastened his hand+
kerchief to the trigger, and with his foot on the other
end was in the act of turning the second barrel upon
himself. Samway his man was the first to see this, and
in the midst of the general horror darted up to him.
Boldwood had already twitched the handkerchief, and
the gun exploded a second time, sending its contents,
by a timely blow from Samway, into the beam which
crossed the ceiling.
"Well, it makes no difference!' Boldwood gasped.
"There is another way for me to die.'
Then he broke from Samway, crossed the room to
Bathsheba, and kissed her hand. He put on his hat,
opened the door, and went into the darkness, nobody
thinking of preventing him.
<C liv>
<P 440>
AFTER THE SHOCK
BOLDWOOD passed into the high road and turned
in the direction of Casterbridge. Here he walked at
an even, steady pace over Yalbury Hill, along the dead
level beyond, mounted Mellstock Hill, and between
eleven and twelve o'clock crossed the Moor into the town.
The streets were nearly deserted now, and the waving
lamp-flames only lighted up rows of grey shop-shutters,
and strips of white paving upon which his step echoed
as his passed along. He turned to the right, and halted
before an archway of heavy stonework, which was closed
by an iron studded pair of doors. This was the entrance
to the gaol, and over it a lamp was fixed, the light en+
abling the wretched traveller to find a belipull.
The small wicket at last opened, and a porter
appeared. Boldwood stepped forward, and said some+
thing in a low tone, when, after a delay, another man
came. Boldwood entered, and the door was closed
behind him, and he walked the world no more.
Long before this time Weatherbury had been
thoroughly aroused, and the wild deed which had ter+
minated Boldwood's merrymaking became known to
all. Of those out of the house Oak was one of the
first to hear of the catastophe, and when he entered
the room, which was about five minutes after Boldwood's
exit, the scene was terrible. All the female guests were
huddled aghast against the walls like sheep in a storm,
and the men were bewildered as to what to do. As for
Bathsheba, she had changed. She was sitting on the
floor beside the body of Troy, his head pillowed in her
lap, where she had herself lifted it. With one hand she
held her handkerchief to his breast and covered the
wound, though scarcely a single drop of blood had
flowed, and with the other she tightly clasped one of
his. The household convulsion had made her herself
again. The
<P 441>
temporary coma had ceased, and activity
had come with the necessity for it. Deeds of endur+
ance, which seem ordinary in philosophy, are rare in
conduct, and Bathsheba was astonishing all around her
now, for her philosophy was her conduct, and she
seldom thought practicable what she did not practise.
She was of the stuff of which great men's mothers
are made. She was indispensable to high generation,
hated at tea parties, feared in shops, and loved at crises.
Troy recumbent in his wife's lap formed now the sole
spectacle in the middle of the spacious room.
"Gabriel,' she said, automatically, when he entered,
turning up a face of which only the weliknown lines
remained to tell him it was hers, all else in the picture
having faded quite. "Ride to Casterbridge instantly
for a surgeon. It is, I believe, useless, but go. Mr.
Boldwood has shot my husband.'
Her statement of the fact in such quiet and simple
words came with more force than a tragic declamation,
and had somewhat the effect of setting the distorted
images in each mind present into proper focus. Oak,
almost before he had comprehended anything beyond
the briefest abstract of the event, hurried out of the
room, saddled a horse and rode away. Not till he had
ridden more than a mile did it occur to him that he
would have done better by sending some other man
on this errand, remaining himself in the house. What
had become of Boldwood? He should have been
looked after. Was he mad -- had there been a quarrel?
Then how had Troy got there? Where had he come
from? How did this remarkable reappearance effect
itself when he was supposed by many to be at the
bottom of the sea? Oak had in some slight measure
been prepared for the presence of Troy by hearing a
rumour of his return just before entering Boldwood's
house ; but before he had weighed that information, this
fatal event had been superimposed. However, it was too
late now to think of sending another messenger, and
he rode on, in the excitement of these self-inquiries
not discerning, when about three miles from Caster+
bridge, a square-figured pedestrian passing along
under the dark hedge in the same direction as his
own.
The miles necessary to be traversed, and other
hindrances
<P 442>
incidental to the lateness of the hour and
the darkness of the night, delayed the arrival of Mr,
Aldritch, the surgeon ; and more than three hours
passed between the time at which the shot was fired
and that of his entering the house. Oak was addition+
ally detained in Casterbridge through having to give
notice to the authorities of what had happened; and
he then found that Boldwood had also entered the
town, and delivercd himself up.
In the meantime the surgeon, having hastened into
the hall at Boldwood's, found it in darkness and quite
deserted. He went on to the back of the house,
where he discovered in the kitchen an old man, of
whom he made inquiries.
"She's had him took away to her own house, sir,'
said his informant.
"Who has?' said the doctor.
"Mrs. Troy. 'A was quite dead, sir.'
This was astonishing information. "She had no
right to do that,' said the doctor. "There will have
to be an inquest, and she should have waited to know
what to do.'
"Yes, sir; it was hinted to her that she had better
wait till the law was known. But she said law was
nothing to her, and she wouldn't let her dear husband's
corpse bide neglected for folks to stare at for all the
crowners in England.'
Mr. Aldritch drove at once back again up the
hill to Bathsheba's. The first person he met was
poor Liddy, who seemed literally to have dwindled
smaller in these few latter hours. "What has been
done?' he said.
"I don't know, sir,' said Liddy, with suspended
breath. "My mistress has done it all.'
"Where is she?'
" Upstairs with him, sir. When he was brought
home and taken upstairs, she said she wanted no
further help from the men. And then she called me,
and made me fill the bath, and after that told me I
had better go and lie down because I looked so ill.
Then she locked herself into the room alone with him,
and would not let a nurse come in, or anybody at all.
But I thought l'd wait in the next room in case she
should want me. I heard her moving about inside
for more than an 
<P 443>
hour, but she only came out once,
and that was for more candles, because hers had burnt
down into the socket. She said we were to let her
know when you or Mr. Thirdly came, sir.'
Oak entered with the parson at this moment, and
they all went upstairs together, preceded by Liddy
Smallbury. Everything was silent as the grave when
they paused on the landing. Liddy knocked, and
Bathsheba's dress was heard rustling across the room:
the key turned in the lock, and she opened the door.
Her looks were calm and nearly rigid, like a slightly
animated bust of Melpomene.
"Oh, Mr. Aldritch, you have come at last,' she
murmured from her lips merely, and threw back the
door. "Ah, and Mr. Thirdly. Well, all is done, and
anybody in the world may see him now.' She then
passed by him, crossed the landing, and entered
another room.
Looking into the chamber of death she had vacated
they saw by the light of the candles which were on the
drawers a tall straight shape lying at the further end
of the bedroom, wrapped in white. Everything around
was quite orderly. The doctor went in, and after a
few minutes returned to the landing again, where
Oak and the parson still waited.
"It is all done, indeed, as she says,' remarked Mr.
Aldritch, in a subdued voice. "The body has been
undressed and properly laid out in grave clothes.
Gracious Heaven -- this mere girl! She must have the
nerve of a stoic!'
"The heart of a wife merely,' floated in a whisper
about the ears of the three, and turning they saw
Bathsheba in the midst of them. Then, as if at that
instant to prove that her fortitude had been more of
will than of spontaneity, she silently sank down between
them and was a shapeless heap of drapery on the floor.
The simple consciousness that superhuman strain was
no longer required had at once put a period to her
power to continue it.
They took her away into a further room, and the
medical attendance which had been useless in Troy's
case was invaluable in Bathsheba's, who fell into a
series of fainting-fits that had a serious aspect for a
time. The sufferer was got to bed, 
<P 444>
and Oak, finding
from the bulletins that nothing really dreadful was to
be apprehended on her score, left the house. Liddy
kept watch in Bathsheba's chamber, where she heard
her mistress, moaning in whispers through the dull
slow hours of that wretched night: "O it is my fault
 -- how can I live! O Heaven, how can I live!'
<C lv>
<P 445>
THE MARCH FOLLOWING -- "BATHSHEBA BOLDWOOD'
WE pass rapidly on into the month of March, to a
breezy day without sunshine, frost, or dew. On Yai
bury Hill, about midway between Weatherbury and
Casterbridge, where the turnpike road passes over
the crest, a numerous concourse of people had
gathered, the eyes of the greater number being fre+
quently stretched afar in a northerly direction. The
groups consisted of a throng of idlers, a party of
javelin-men, and two trumpeters, and in the midst
were carriages, one of which contained the high
sheriff. With the idlers, many of whom had mounted
to the top of a cutting formed for the road, were several
Weatherbury men and boys -- among others Poorgrass,
Coggan, and Cain Ball.
At the end of half-an-hour a faint dust was seen in
the expected quarter, and shortly after a travelling+
carriage, bringing one of the two judges on the Western
Circuit, came up the hill and halted on the top. The
judge changed carriages whilst a flourish was blown
by the big-cheeked trumpeters, and a procession being
formed of the vehicles and javelin-men, they all pro+
ceeded towards the town, excepting the Weatherbury
men, who as soon as they had seen the judge move
off returned home again to their work.
" Joseph, I zeed you squeezing close to the carriage,"
said Coggan, as they walked. "Did ye notice my lord
judge's face ?'
"I did,' said Poorgrass. "I looked hard at en, as
if I would read his very soul; and there was mercy
in his eyes -- or to speak with the exact truth required
of us at this solemn time, in the eye that was towards
me.'
"Well, I hope for the best,' said Coggan, though
bad that must be. However, I shan't go to the trial,
and I'd advise the rest of ye that bain't wanted to bide
away. 'Twill disturb his 
<P 446>
mind more than anything to
see us there staring at him as if he were a show.'
" The very thing I said this morning,' observed Joseph,
"Justice is come to weigh him in the balances," I said
in my reflectious way, "and if he's found wanting, so
be it unto him," and a bystander said "Hear, hear,
A man who can talk like that ought to be heard.'
But I don't like dwelling upon it, for my few words
are my few words, and not much; though the speech
of some men is rumoured abroad as though by nature
formed for such.'
"So 'tis, Joseph. And now, neighbours, as I said,
every man bide at home.'
The resolution was adhered to ; and all waited
anxiously for the news next day. Their suspense
was diverted, however, by a discovery which was made
in the afternoon, throwing more light on Boldwood's
conduct and condition than any details which had
preceded it.
That he had been from the time of Greenhill Fair
until the fatal Christmas Eve in excited and unusual
moods was known to those who had been intimate
with him; but nobody imagined that there had shown
in him unequivocal symptoms of the mental derange+
ment which Bathsheha and Oak, alone of all others
and at different times, had momentarily suspected.
In a locked closet was now discovered an extraordinary
collection of articles. There were several sets of ladies'
dresses in the piece, of sundry expensive materials;
silks and satins, poplins and velvets, all of colours
which from Bathsheba's style of dress might have been
judged to be her favourites. There were two muffs,
sable and ermine. Above all there was a case of
jewellery, containing four heavy gold bracelets and
several lockets and rings, all of fine quality and manu+
facture. These things had been bought in Bath and
other towns from time to time, and brought home by
stealth. They were all carefully packed in paper, and
each package was labelled " Bathsheba Boldwood,' a
date being subjoined six years in advance in every
instance.
These somewhat pathetic evidences of a mind crazed
with care and love were the subject of discourse in
<P 447>
Warren's malt-house when Oak entered from Caster+
bridge with tidings of the kiln glow shone upon
it, told the tale sufficiently well. Boldwood, as every
one supposed he would do, had pleaded guilty, and
had been sentenced to death.
The conviction that Boldwood had not been morally
responsible for his later acts now becam general. Facts
elicited previous to the trial had pointed strongly in the
same direction, but they had not been of sufficient weight
to lead to an order for an examination into the state
of Boldwood's mind. It was astonishing, now that a
presumption of insanity was raised, how many collateral
circumstances were remembered to which a condition
of mental disease seemed to afford the only explanation
 -- among others, the unprecedented neglect of his corn
stacks in the previous summer.
A petition was addressed to the Home Secretary,
advancing the circumstances which appeared to justify
a request for a reconsideration of the sentence. It was
not "numerously signed ' by the inhabitants of Caster+
bridge, as is usual in such cases, for Boldwood had
never made many friends over the counter. The shops
thought it very natural that a man who, by importing
direct from the producer, had daringly set aside the
first great principle of provincial existence, namely
that God made country villages to supply customers
to county towns, should have confused ideas about
the Decalogue. The prompters were a few merciful
men who had perhaps too feelingly considered the
facts latterly unearthed, and the result was that evidence
was taken which it was hoped might remove the crime
in a moral point of view, out of the category of wilful
murder, and lead it to be regarded as a sheer outcome
of madness.
The upshot of the petition was waited for in Weather+
bury with solicitous interest. The execution had been
fixed for eight o'clock on a Saturday morning about a
fortnight after the sentence was passed, and up to
Friday afternoon no answer had been recieved. At
that time Gabriel came from Casterbridge Gaol, whither
he had been to wish Boldwood good-bye, and turned
down a by-street to avoid the town. When past the last
<P 448>
house he heard a hammering, and lifting his bowed
head he looked back for a moment. Over the chimneys
he could see the upper part of the gaol entrance, rich
and glowing in the afternoon sun, and some moving
figures were there. They were carpenters lifting a post
into a vertical position within the parapet. He with+
drew his eyes quickly, and hastened on.
It was dark when he reached home, and half the
village was out to meet him.
"No tidings,' Gabriel said, wearily. "And I'm afraid
there's no hope. I've been with him more than two
hours.'
"Do ye think he <1really>1 was out of his mind when he
did it?' said Smallbury.
" I can't honestly say that I do,' Oak replied. " How+
ever, that we can talk of another time. Has there been
any change in mistress this afternoon?'
"None at all.'
"Is she downstairs?'
"No. And getting on so nicely as she was too.
She's but very little better now again than she was at
Christmas. She keeps on asking if you be come, and
if there's news, till one's wearied out wi' answering her.
Shall I go and say you've come?'
"No,' said Oak. "There's a chance yet; but I
couldn't stay in town any longer -- after seeing him too,
So Laban -- Laban is here, isn't he ? '
" Yes,' said Tall.
"What I've arranged is, that you shall ride to town
the last thing to-night ; leave here about nine, and wait
a while there, getting home about twelve. If nothing
has been received by eleven to-night, they say there's
no chance at all.'
"I do so hope his life will be spared,' said Liddy.
"If it is not, she'll go out of her mind too. Poor thing;
her sufferings have been dreadful; she deserves any+
body's pity.'
"Is she altered much ? ' said Coggan.
"If you haven't seen poor mistress since Christmas,
you wouldn't know her,' said Liddy. " Her eyes are so
miserable that she's not the same woman. Only two
years ago she was a romping girl, and now she's this!'
Laban departed as directed, and at eleven o'clock
that night 
<P 449>
several of the villagers strolled along the
road to Casterbridge and awaited his arrivai-among
them Oak, and nearly all the rest of Bathsheba's men.
Gabriel's anxiety was great that Boldwood might be
saved, even though in his conscience he felt that he
ought to die; for there had been qualities in the farmer
which Oak loved. At last, when they all were weary
the tramp of a horse was heard in the distance --
First dead, as if on turf it trode,
Then, clattering  on the village road
In other pace than forth he yode.
'We shall soon know now, one way or other,' said
Coggan, and they all stepped down from the bank on
which they had been standing into the road, and the
rider pranced into the midst of them.
"Is that you, Laban ? ' said Gabriel.
"Yes -- 'tis come. He's not to die. 'Tis confine+
ment during her Majesty's pleasure.'
"Hurrah!' said Coggan, with a swelling heart. "God's
above the devil yet!'
<C lvi>
<P 450>
BEAUTY IN LONELINESS -- AFTER ALL
BATHSHEBA revived with the spring. The utter
prostration that had followed the low fever from which
she had sufered diminished perceptibly when all un+
certainty upon every subject had come to an end.
But she remained alone now for the greater part of
her time, and stayed in the house, or at furthest went
into the garden. She shunned every one, even Liddy,
and could be brought to make no confidences, and to
ask for no sympathy.
As the summer drew on she passed more of her time
in the open air, and began to examine into farming
matters from sheer necessity, though she never rode
out or personally superintended as at former times.
One Friday evening in August she walked a little way
along the road and entered the village for the first time
since the sombre event of the preceding Christmas.
None of the old colour had as yet come to her cheek,
and its absolute paleness was heightened by the jet black
of her gown, till it appeared preternatural. When she
reached a little shop at the other end of the place,
which stood nearly opposite to the churchyard, Bath+
sheba heard singing inside the church, and she knew
that the singers were practising. She crossed the road,
opened the gate, and entered the graveyard, the high
sills of the church windows effectually screening her
from the eyes of those gathered within. Her stealthy
walk was to the nook wherein Troy had worked at
planting flowers upon Fanny Robin's grave, and she
came to the marble tombstone.
A motion of satisfaction enlivened her face as she
read the complete inscription. First came the words of
Troy himself: --
<P 451>
ERECTED BY FRANCIS TROY
IN BELOVEO MEMORY OF
FANNY ROBIN,
WHO DIED OCTOBER 9, 18 -- ,
AGED 20 YEARS.
Unerneath this was now inscribed in new letters: --
IN THE SAME GRAVE LIE
THE REMAINS OF THE AFORESAID
FRANCIS TROY,
WHO DIED DECEMBER 24TH, 18 -- ,
Whilst she stood and read and meditated the tones of
the organ began again in the church, and she went
with the same light step round to the porch and listened.
The door was closed, and the coir was learning a new
hymn. Bathsheba was stirred by emotions which
latterly she had assumed to be altogether dead within
her. The little attenuated voices of the children
brought to her ear in destinct utterance the words they
sang without thought or comprehension --
Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom,
Lead Thou me on.
Bathsheba's feeling was always to some extent de+
pendent upon her whim, as is the case with many other
women. Something big came into her throat and an
uprising to her eyes -- and she thought that she would
allow the imminent tears to flow if they wished. They
did flow and plenteously, and one fell upon the stone
bench beside her. Once that she had begun to cry for
she hardly knew what, she could not leave off for crowd+
ing thoughts she knew too well. She would have given
anything in the world to be, as those children were, un+
concerned at the meaning of their words, because too
innocent to feel the necessity for any such expression.
All the impassioned scenes of her brief expenence
seemed to revive with added emotion at that moment,
and those scenes which had been without emotion
<P 452>
during enactment had emotion then. Yet grief came
to her rather as a luxury than as the scourge of former
times.
Owing to Bathsheba's face being buried in her hands
she did not notice a form which came quietly into the
porch, and on seeing her, first moved as if to retreat,
then paused and regarded her. Bathsheba did not raise
her head for some time, and when she looked round
her face was wet, and her eyes drowned and dim. "Mr.
Oak,' exclaimed she, disconcerted, " how long have you
been here ?'
"A few minutes, ma'am,' said Oak, respectfully.
"Are you going in?' said Bathsheba; and there came
from within the church as from a prompter --
l loved the garish day, and, spite of fears,
pride ruled my will: remember not past years.
"I was,' said Gabriel. " I am one of the bass singers,
you know. I have sung bass for several months.
"Indeed: I wasn't aware of that. I'll leave you, then.'
Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile,
sang the children.
"Don't let me drive you away, mistress. I think I
won't go in to-night.'
"O no -- you don't drive me away.
Then they stood in a state of some embarrassment
Bathsheba trying to wipe her dreadfully drenched and
inflamed face without his noticing her. At length Oak
said, I've not seen you-i mean spoken to you -- since
ever so long, have I?' But he feared to bring distress+
ing memories back, and interrupted himself with: "Were
you going into church ?'
"No,' she said. I came to see the tombstone
privately -- to see if they had cut the inscription as I
wished Mr. Oak, you needn't mind speaking to me, if
you wish to, on the matter which is in both our minds
at this moment.'
"And have they done it as you wished ?' said Oak.
"Yes. Come and see it, if you have not already.'
So together they went and read the tomb. "Eight
months 
<P 453>
ago!' Gabriel murmured when he saw the date.
'It seems like yesterday to me.'
And to me as if it were years ago-iong years, and
I had been dead between. And now I am going home,
Mr. Oak.'
Oak walked after her. 'I wanted to name a small
matter to you as soon as I could,' he said, with hesitation.
"Merrly about business, and I think I may just mention it
now, if you'll allow me.'
" O yes, certainly.'
It is that I may soon have to give up the manage+
ment of your farm, Mrs. Troy. The fact is, I am think+
ing of leaving England -- not yet, you know -- next
spring. '
"Leaving England!' she said, in surprise and
genuine disappointment.' Why, Gabriel, what are you
going to do that for?'
"Well, I've thought it best,' Oak stammered out.
"California is the spot I've had in my mind to try.'
"But it is understood everywhere that you are going
to take poor Mr. Boldwood's farm on your own account.'
"I've had the refusal o' it 'tis true; but nothing is
settled yet, and I have reasons for gieing up. I shall
finish out my year there as manager for the trustees,
but no more.'
"And what shall I do without you? Oh, Gabriel, I
don't think you ought to go away. You've been with
me so long -- through bright times and dark times -- such
old friends that as we are -- that it seems unkind almost. I
had fancied that if you leased the other farm as master,
you might still give a helping look across at mine. And
now going away!'
"I would have willingly.'
" Yet now that I am more helpless than ever you go
away!'
"Yes, that's the ill fortune o' it,' said Gabriel, in a
distressed tone. "And it is because of that very help+
lessness that I feel bound to go. Good afternoon,
ma'am ' he concluded, in evident anxiety to get
away, and at once went out of the churchyard by a
path she could follow on no pretence whatever.
Bathsheba went home, her mind occupied with a
new trouble, which being rather harassing than deadly
was calculated to do good by diverting her from the
chronic gloom of 
<P 454>
her life. She was set thinking a great
deal about Oak and of his wich to shun her; and there
occurred to Bathsheba several incidents of latter in+
tercourse with him, which, trivial when singly viewed
amounted together to a perceptible disinclination for
her society. It broke upon her at length as a great
pain that her last old disciple was about to forsake her
and flee. He who had believed in her and argued on
her side when all the rest of the world was against her,
had at last like the others become weary and neglectful
of the old cause, and was leaving her to fight her battles
alone.
Three weeks went on, and more evidence of his
want of interest in her was forthcoming. She noticed
that instead of entering the small parlour or office
where the farm accounts were kept, and waiting, or
leaving a memorandum as he had hitherto done during
her seclusion, Oak never came at all when she was likely
to be there, only entering at unseasonable hours when
her presence in that part of the house was least to be
expected. Whenever he wanted directions he sent a
message, or note with neither heading nor signature, to
which she was obliged to reply in the same off-hand
style. Poor Bathsheba began to suffer now from the
most torturing sting of ali-a sensation that she was
despised.
The autumn wore away gloomily enough amid these
melancholy conjectures, and Christmas-day came, com+
pleting a year of her legal widowhood, and two years
and a quarter of her life alone. On examining her
heart it appeared beyond measure strange that the sub+
ject of which the season might have been supposed
suggestive -- the event in the hall at Boldwood's -- was
not agitating her at all; but instead, an agonizing con+
viction that everybody abjured her -- for what she could
not teli-and that Oak was the ringleader of the
recusants. Coming out of church that day she looked
round in hope that Oak, whose bass voice she had
heard rolling out from the gallery overhead in a most
unconcerned manner, might chance to linger in her path
in the old way. There he was, as usual, coming down
the path behind her. But on seeing Bathsheba turn, he
looked aside, and as soon as he got beyond the gate,
<P 455>
and there was the barest excuse for a divergence, he
made one, and vanished.
The next morning brought the culminating stroke;
she had been expecting it long. It was a formal notice
by letter from him that he should not renew his engage+
ment with her for the following Lady-day.
Bathsheba actually sat and cried over this letter most
bitterly. She was aggrieved and wounded that the
possession of hopeless love from Gabriel, which she had
AFTER ALL
grown to regard as her inalienable right for life, should
have been withdrawn just at his own pleasure in this
way. She was bewildered too by the prospect of having
to rely on her own resources again: it seemed to herself
that she never could again acquire energy sufficient to
go to market, barter, and sell. Since Troy's death Oak
had attended all sales and fairs for her, transacting her
business at the same time with his own. What should
she do now? Her life was becoming a desolation.
So desolate was Bathsheba this evening, that in an
absolute hunger for pity and sympathy, and miserable in
that she appeared to have outlived the only true friend+
ship she had ever owned, she put on her bonnet and
cloak and went down to Oak's house just after sunset,
guided on her way by the pale primrose rays of a
crescent moon a few days old.
A lively firelight shone from the window, but nobody
was visible in the room. She tapped nervously, and
then thought it doubtful if it were right for a single
woman to call upon a bachelor who lived alone, although
he was her manager, and she might be supposed to call
on business without any real impropriety. Gabriel
opened the door, and the moon shone upon his fore+
haad.
"Mr. Oak,' said Bathsheba, faintly.
"Yes; I am Mr. Oak,' said Gabriel. "Who have I
the honour -- O how stupid of me, not to know you,
mistress!'
"I shall not be your mistress much longer, shall I
Gabriel?' she said, in pathetic tones.
"Well, no. I suppose -- But come in, ma'am. Oh --
and I'll get a light,' Oak replied, with some awkwardness.
<P 456>
"No; not on my account.'
"It is so seldom that I get a lady visitor that I'm
afraid I haven't proper accommodation. Will you sit
down, please ? Here's a chair, and there's one, too.
I am sorry that my chairs all have wood scats, and are
rather hard, but i-was thinging of getting some new
ones.' Oak placed two or three for her.
"They are quite easy enough for me.'
So down she sat, and down sat he, the fire dancing
in their faces, and upon the old furniture
all a-sheenen
Wi' long years o' handlen,
that formed Oak's array of household possessions, which
sent back a dancing reflection in reply. It was very
odd to these two persons, who knew each other passing
well, that the mere circumstance of their meeting in a
new place and in a new way should make them so
awkward and constrained. In the fields, or at her house,
there had never been any embarrassment; but now that
Oak had become the entertainer their lives seemed to be
moved back again to the days when they were strangers.
"You'll think it strange that I have come, but -- -'
"O no; not at all.'
"But I thought -- Gabriel, I have been uneasy in the
belief that I have offended you, and that you are going
away on that account. It grieved me very much and
I couldn't help coming.'
"Offended me! As if you could do that, Bathsheba!'
"Haven't I?' she asked, gladly. " But, what are you
going away for else?'
"I am not going to emigrate, you know; I wasn't
aware that you would wish me not to when I told 'ee or I
shouldn't ha' thought of doing it,' he said, simply. "I
have arranged for Little Weatherbury Farm and shall
have it in my own hands at Lady-day. You know I've
had a share in it for some time. Still, that wouldn't
prevent my attending to your business as before, hadn't
it been that things have been said about us.'
<P 457>
"What?' said Bathsheba, in surprise. "Things said
about you and me! What are they?'
"I cannot tell you.'
"It would be wiser if you were to, I think. You have
played the part of mentor to me many times, and I don't
see why you should fear to do it now.'
"It is nothing that you have done, this time. The
top and tail o't is this -- that I am sniffing about here,
and waiting for poor Boldwood's farm, with a thought
of getting you some day.'
"Getting me! What does that mean?'
"Marrying o' 'ee, in plain British. You asked me to
tell, so you mustn't blame me.'
Bathsheba did not look quite so alarmed as if a
cannon had been discharged by her ear, which was what
Oak had expected. "Marrying me! I didn't know it
was that you meant,' she said, quietly. "Such a thing
as that is too absurd -- too soon -- to think of, by far!'
"Yes; of course, it is too absurd. I don't desire any
such thing; I should think that was plain enough by
this time. Surely, surely you be the last person in the
world I think of marrying. It is too absurd, as you say
""Too -- s-s-soon" were the words I used.'
"I must beg your pardon for correcting you, but you
said, ""too absurd,"' and so do I.'
"I beg your pardon too! she returned, with tears
in her eyes. """Too soon"' was what I said. But it
doesn't matter a bit -- not at ali-but I only meant,
""too soon"' Indeed, I didn't, Mr. Oak, and you must
believe me!'
Gabriel looked her long in the face, but the firelight
being faint there was not much to be seen. " Bathsheba,'
he said, tenderly and in surprise, and coming closer:
"if I only knew one thing -- whether you would allow me
to love you and win you, and marry you after ali-if I
only knew that!'
"But you never will know,' she murmured.
"Why?'
"Because you never ask.
"Oh -- Oh!' said Gabriel, with a low laugh of joyous+
ness. "My own dear -- -'
<P 458>
"You ought not to have sent me that harsh letter
this morning,' she interrupted. "It shows you didn't
care a bit about me, and were ready to desert me like
all the rest of them! It was very cruel of you, consider+
ing I was the first sweetheart that you ever had, and
you were the first I ever had; and I shall not forget it!'
"Now, Bathsheba, was ever anybody so provoking
he said, laughing. " You know it was purely that I, as
an unmarried man, carrying on a business for you as a
very taking young woman, had a proper hard part to
play -- more particular that people knew I had a sort
of feeling for'ee; and I fancied, from the way we were
mentioned together, that it might injure your good name.
Nobody knows the heat and fret I have been caused
by it.'
"And was that all?'
"All.'
"Oh, how glad I am I came!' she exclaimed, thank+
fully, as she rose from her seat. "I have thought so
much more of you since I fancied you did not want
even to see me again. But I must be going now, or I
shall be missed. Why Gabriel,' she said, with a slight
laugh, as they went to the door, "it seems exactly as if
I had come courting you -- how dreadful!'
"And quite right too,' said Oak. "I've danced at
your skittish heels, my beautiful Bathsheba, for many a
long mile, and many a long day; and it is hard to be+
grudge me this one visit.'
He accompanied her up the hill, explaining to her
the details of his forthcoming tenure of the other farm.
They spoke very little of their mutual  feeling; pretty
phrases and warm expressions being probably un+
necessary between such tried friends. Theirs was that
substantial affection which arises (if any arises at all)
when the two who are thrown together begin first by
knowing the rougher sides of each other's character,
and not the best till further on, the romance growing
up in the interstices of a mass of hard prosaic reality.
This good-fellowship -- <1camaraderie>1 --  usually occurring
through similarity of pursuits, is unfortunately seldom
superadded to love between the sexes, because men and
women associate, not in their lahours, but in their
pleasures merely. Where, however, happy circumstance
<P 459>
permits its development, the compounded feeling proves
itself to be the only love which is strong as death -- that
love which many waters cannot quench, nor the floods
drown, beside which the passion usually called by the
name is evanescent as steam.
<C lvii>
<P 460>
A FOGGY NIGHT AND MORNING -- CONCLUSION
"THE most private, secret, plaines wedding that it is
possible to have.'
Those had been Bathsheba's words to Oak one
evening, some time after the event of the preceding
chapter, and he meditated a full hour by the clock upon
how to carry out her wishes to the letter.
"A licence -- O yes, it must be a licence,' he said
to himself at last. "Very well, then; first, a license.'
On a dark night, a few days later, Oak came with
mysterious steps from the surrogate's door, in Caster+
bridge. On the way home he heard a heavy tread in
front of him, and, overtaking the man, found him to be
Coggan. They walked together into the village until
they came to a little lane behind the church, leading
down to the cottage of Laban Tall, who had lately been
installed as clerk of the parish, and was yet in mortal
terror at church on Sundays when he heard his lone
voice among certain hard words of the Psalms, whither
no man ventured to follow him.
"Well, good-night, Coggan,' said Oak, "I'm going
down this way.'
"Oh!' said Coggan, surprised; "what's going on to+
night then, make so bold Mr. Oak?'
It seemed rather ungenerous not to tell Coggan,
under the circumstances, for Coggan had been true as
steel all through the time of Gabriel's unhappiness about
Bathsheba, and Gabriel said, " You can keep a secret,
Coggan?'
"You've proved me, and you know.'
"Yes, I have, and I do know. Well, then, mistress
and I mean to get married to-morrow morning.'
"Heaven's high tower! And yet I've thought of
such a thing 
<P 461>
from time to time; true, I have. But
keeping it so close! Well, there, 'tis no consarn of
amine, and I wish 'ee joy o' her.'
"Thank you, Coggan. But I assure 'ee that this
great hush is not what I wished for at all, or what
either of us would have wished if it hadn't been for
certain things that would make a gay wedding seem
hardly the thing. Bathsheba has a great wish that all
the parish shall not be in church, looking at her -- she's
shyiike and nervous about it, in fact -- so I be doing
this to humour her.'
"Ay, I see: quite right, too, I suppose I must say.
And you be now going down to the clerk.'
"Yes; you may as well come with me.'
"I am afeard your labour in keeping it close will be
throwed away,' said Coggan, as they walked along.
"Labe Tall's old woman will horn it all over parish in
half-an-hour. '
"So she will, upon my life; I never thought of
that,' said Oak, pausing. "Yet I must tell him to+
night, I suppose, for he's working so far off, and leaves
early.'
"I'll tell 'ee how we could tackle her,' said Coggan.
"I'll knock and ask to speak to Laban outside the door,
you standing in the background. Then he'll come out,
and you can tell yer tale. She'll never guess what I
want en for; and I'll make up a few words about the
farm-work, as a blind.'
This scheme was considered feasible; and Coggan
advanced boldly, and rapped at Mrs. Tall's door. Mrs.
Tall herself opened it.
"I wanted to have a word with Laban.'
"He's not at home, and won't be this side of eleven
o'clock. He've been forced to go over to Yalbury since
shutting out work. I shall do quite as well.'
"I hardly think you will. Stop a moment;' and
Coggan stepped round the corner of the porch to consult
Oak.
"Who's t'other man, then?' said Mrs. Tall.
"Only a friend,' said Coggan.
"Say he's wanted to meet mistress near church-hatch
to-morrow morning at ten,' said Oak, in a whisper.
"That he must come without fail, and wear his best
clothes.'
<P 462>
"The clothes will floor us as safe as houses!' said
Coggan.
"It can't be helped said Oak. "Tell her.'
So Coggan delivered the message. "Mind, het or
wet, blow or snow, he must come, added Jan. "'Tis
very particular, indeed. The fact is, 'tis to witness her
sign some law-work about taking shares wi' another
farmer for a long span o' years. There, that's what 'tis,
and now I've told 'ee, Mother Tall, in a way I shouldn't
ha' done if I hadn't loved 'ee so hopeless well.'
Coggan retired before she could ask any further;
and next they called at the vicar's in a manner which
excited no curiosity at all. Then Gabriel went home,
and prepared for the morrow.
"Liddy,' said Bathsheba, on going to bed that night,
"I want you to call me at seven o'clock to-morrow, In
case I shouldn't wake.'
"But you always do wake afore then, ma'am.'
"Yes, but I have something important to do, which
I'll tell you of when the time comes, and it's best to
make sure.'
CONCLUSION
Bathsheba, however, awoke voluntarily at four, nor
could she by any contrivance get to sleep again. About
six, being quite positive that her watch had stopped
during the night, she could wait no longer. She went
and tapped at Liddy's door, and after some labour awoke
her.
"But I thought it was I who had to call you?' said
the bewildered Liddy. "And it isn't six yet.'
"Indeed it is; how can you tell such a story, Liddy?
I know it must be ever so much past seven. Come to
my room as soon as you can; I want you to give my
hair a good brushing.'
When Liddy came to Bathsheba's room her mistress
was already waiting. Liddy could not understand
this extraordinary promptness. " Whatever <1is>1 going on,
ma'am?' she said.
"Well, I'll tell you,' said Bathsheba, with a mischiev+
ous smile in her bright eyes. "Farmer Oak is coming
here to dine with me to-day!'
"Farmer Oak -- and nobody else ? -- you two alone?'
"Yes.'
<P 463>
"But is it safe, ma'am, after what's been said?' asked
her companion, dubiously. "A woman's good name is
such a perishable article that --  -- '
Bathsheba laughed with a flushed cheek, and
whispered in Liddy's ear, although there was nobody
present. Then Liddy stared and exclaimcd, " Souls
alive, what news! It makes my heart go quite
bumpity-bump"
"It makes mine rather furious, too,' said Bathsheba.
"However, there's no getting out of it now!'
It was a damp disagreeable morning. Nevertheless,
at twenty minutes to ten o'clock, Oak came out of his
house, and
Went up the hill side
With that sort of stride
A man puts out when walking in search of a bride,
and knocked Bathsheba's door. Ten minutes later
a large and a smaller umbrella might have been seen
moving from the same door, and through the mist along
the road to the church. The distance was not more
than a quarter of a mile, and these two sensible persons
deemed it unnecessary to drive. An observer must have
been very close indeed to discover that the forms under
the umbrellas were those of Oak and Bathsheba, arm-in+
arm for the first time in their lives, Oak in a greatcoat
extending to his knees, and Bathsheba in a cloak that
reached her clogs. Yet, though so plainly dressed
there was a certain rejuvenated appearance about her : --
  As though a rose should shut and be a bud again.
Repose had again incarnadined her cheeks; and having,
at Gabriel's request, arranged her hair this morning as
she had worn it years ago on Norcombe Hill, she seemed
in his eyes remarkably like a girl of that fascinating
dream, which, considering that she was now only three
or four-and-twenty, was perhaps not very wonderful. In
the church were Tall, Liddy, and the parson, and in a
remarkably short space of time the deed was done.
The two sat down very quietly to tea in Bathsheba's
parlour in the evening of the same day, for it had been
arranged that 
<P 464>
Farmer Oak should go there to live, since
he had as yet neither money, house, nor furniture worthy
of the name, though he was on a sure way towards them,
whilst Bathsheba was, comparatively, in a plethora of all
three.
Just as Bathsheba was pouring out a cup of tea,
their ears were greeted by the firing of a cannon,
followed by what seemed like a tremendous blowing of
trumpets, in the front of the house.
"There!' said Oak, laughing, "I knew those fellows
were up to something, by the look on their face; '
Oak took up the light and went into the porch,
followed by Bathsheba with a shawl over her head. The
rays fell upon a group of male figures gathered upon the
gravel in front, who, when they saw the newly-married
couple in the porch, set up a loud "Hurrah!' and at
the same moment bang again went the cannon in the
background, followed by a hideous clang of music from
a drum, tambourine, clarionet, serpent, hautboy, tenor+
viol, and double-bass -- the only remaining relics of the
true and original Weatherbury band -- venerable worm+
eaten instruments, which had celebrated in their own
persons the victories of Marlhorough, under the fingers
of the forefathers of those who played them now. The
performers came forward, and marched up to the
front.
"Those bright boys, Mark Clark and Jan, are at the
bottom of all this,' said Oak. " Come in, souls, and
have something to eat and drink wi' me and my wife.'
"Not to-night,' said Mr. Clark, with evident self+
denial. "Thank ye all the same; but we'll call at a
more seemly time. However, we couldn't think of
letting the day pass without a note of admiration of
some sort. If ye could send a drop of som'at down to
Warren's, why so it is. Here's long life and happiness
to neighbour Oak and his comely bride!'
"Thank ye; thank ye all,' said Gabriel. "A bit and
a drop shall be sent to Warren's for ye at once. I had
a thought that we might very likely get a salute of some
sort from our old friends, and I was saying so to my
wife but now.'
"Faith,' said Coggan, in a critical tone, turning to his
companions, "the man hev learnt to say ""my wife"'
in a wonderful 
<P 465>
naterel way, considering how very youth+
ful he is in wedlock as yet -- hey, neighbours all?'
"I never heerd a skilful old married feller of twenty
years' standing pipe ""my wife"' in a more used note
than 'a did,' said Jacob Smallbury. "It might have been
a little more true to nater if't had been spoke a little
chillier, but that wasn't to be expected just now.
"That improvement will come wi' time,' said Jan,
twirling his eye.
Then Oak laughed, and Bathsheba smiled (for she
never laughed readily now), and their friends turned to
go.
"Yes; I suppose that's the size o't,' said Joseph
Poorgrass with a cheerful sigh as they moved away;
"and I wish him joy o' her; though I were once or
twice upon saying to-day with holy Hosea, in my
scripture manner, which is my second nature. ""Ephraim
is joined to idols: let him alone."' But since 'tis as 'tis
why, it might have been worse, and I feel my thanks
accordingly.'
THE END
