is very
night.
Troy turned up the hill and quickened his pace.
Boldwood stepped forward.
" Sergeant Troy ? '
" Yes-i'm Sergeant Troy.'
" Just arrived from up the country, I think ?'
" Just arrived from Bath.'
" I am William Boldwood.'
" Indeed.'
The tone in which this word was uttered was all
that had been wanted to bring Boldwood to the
point.
" I wish to speak a word with you,' he said.
" What about ? '
" About her who lives just ahead there -- and about
a woman you have wronged.'
" I wonder at your impertinence,' said Troy, moving
on.
" Now look here,' said Boldwood, standing in front
of him, " wonder or not, you are going to hold a conver+
sation with me.'
Troy heard the dull determination in Boldwood's
voice, looked at his stalwart frame, then at the thick
cudgel he carried in his hand. He remembered it was
past ten o'clock. It seemed worth while to be civil to
Boldwood.
" Very well, I'll listen with pleasure,' said Troy,
placing his bag on the ground, "only speak low, for
somebody or other may overhear us in the farmhouse
there.'
" Well then -- I know a good deal concerning your
Fanny Robin's attachment to you. I may say, too, that
I believe I am the only person in the village, excepting
Gabriel Oak, who does know it. You ought to marry
her.'
" I suppose I ought. Indeed, l wish to, but I
cannot.'
" Why ? '
Troy was about to utter something hastily; he then
checked
<P 285>
himself and said, "I am too poor.' His voice
was changed. Previously it had had a deviimay-care
tone. It was the voice of a trickster now.
Boldwood's present mood was not critical enough to
notice tones. He continued, "I may as well speak
plainly; and understand, I don't wish to enter into the
questions of right or wrong, woman's honour and shame,
or to express any opinion on your conduct. I intend a
business transaction with you.'
" I see,' said Troy. " Suppose we sit down here.'
An old tree trunk lay under the hedge immediately
opposite, and they sat down.
The tone in which this word was uttered was all
Troy heard the dull determination in Boldwood's
voice, looked at his stalwart frame, then at the thick
plainly ; and understand, I don't wish to enter into the
" I was engaged to be married to Miss Everdene,'
said Boldwood, "but you came and --  -- '
" Not engaged,' said Troy.
" As good as engaged.'
" If I had not turned up she might have become en+
gaged to you.'
" Hang might ! '
" Would, then.'
" If you had not come I should certainly -- yes,
certainly -- have been accepted by this time. If you had
not seen her you might have been married to Fanny.
Well, there's too much difference between Miss Ever+
dene's station and your own for this flirtation with her
ever to benefit you by ending in marriage. So all I ask
is, don't molest her any more. Marry Fanny.
make it worth your while.'
" How will you ?'
" I'll pay you well now, I'll settle a sum of money
upon her, and I'll see that you don't suffer from poverty
in the future. I'll put it clearly. Bathsheba is only
playing with you: you are too poor for her as I said;
so give up wasting your time about a great match you'll
never make for a moderate and rightful match you may
make to-morrow; take up your carpet-bag, turn about,
leave Weatherbury now, this night, and you shall take
fifty pounds with you. Fanny shall have fifty to enable
her to prepare for the wedding, when you have told me
where she is living, and she shall have five hundred
paid down on her wedding-day.'
<P 286>
In making this statement Boldwood's voice revealed
only too clearly a consciousness of the weakness of his
position, his aims, and his method. His manner had
lapsed quite from that of the firm and dignified Bold+
wood of former times; and such a scheme as he had
now engaged in he would have condemned as childishly
imbecile only a few months ago. We discern a grand
force in the lover which helacks whilst a free man; but
there is a breadth of vision in the free man which in
the lover we vainly seek. Where there is much bias
there must be some narrowness, and love, though added
emotion, is subtracted capacity. Boldwood exemplified
this to an abnormal degree: he knew nothing of Fanny
Robin's circumstances or whereabouts, he knew nothing
of Troy's possibilities, yet that was what he said.
" I like Fanny best,' said Troy; "and if, as you say,
Miss Everdene is out of my reach, why I have all to
gain by accepting your money, and marrying Fan. But
she's only a servant.'
" Never mind -- do you agree to my arrangement ?'
" I do.'
" Ah ! ' said Boldwood, in a more elastic voice. "O,
Troy, if you like her best, why then did you step in here
and injure my happiness ? '
" I love Fanny best now,' said Troy. "But
Bathsh --  -- Miss Everdene inflamed me, and displaced
Fanny for a time. It is over now.'
" Why should it be over so soon? And why then
did you come here again ? '
" There are weighty reasons. Fifty pounds at once,
you said !'
" I did,' said Boldwood, " and here they are -- fifty
sovereigns.' He handed Troy a small packet.
" You have everything ready -- it seems that you
calculated on my accepting them,' said the sergeant,
taking the packet.
" I thought you might accept them,' said Boldwood.
" You've only my word that the programme shall be
adhered to, whilst I at any rate have fifty pounds.'
" l had thought of that, and l have considered that
if I can't appeal to your honour I can trust to your --
well, shrewdness we'll call it -- not to lose five hundred
pounds in prospect, and
<P 287>
also make a bitter enemy of a
man who is willing to be an extremely useful friend.'
" Stop, listen ! ' said Troy in a whisper.
A light pit-pat was audible upon the road just above
them.
'By George -- 'tis she,' he continued. 'I must go
on and meet her.'
'She -- who ? '
'Bathsheba.'
'Bathsheba -- out alone at this time o' night .! ' said
Boldwood in amazement, and starting up. ' Why must
you meet her ?'
'She was expecting me to-night -- and I must now
speak to her, and wish her good-bye, according to your
wish. '
'I don't see the necessity of speaking.'
'It can do no harm -- and she'll be wandering about
looking for me if I don't. You shall hear all I say to her.
It will help you in your love-making when I am gone.'
'Your tone is mocking.'
'O no. And renaember this, if she does not know
what has become of me, she will think more about me
than if I tell her flatly I have come to give her up.'
'Will you confine your words to that one point ? -- +
Shall I hear every word you say ? '
'Every word. Now sit still there, and hold my'
carpet bag for me, and mark what you hear.'
The light footstep came closer, halting occasionally,
as if the walker listened for a sound. Troy whistled a
double note in a soft, fluty tone.
'Come to that, is it ! ' murmured Boldwood, uneasily.
'You promised silence,' said Troy.
'I promise again.'
Troy stepped forward.
'Frank, dearest, is that you ? ' The tones were
Bathsheba's.
'O God .! ' said Boldwood.
'Yes,' said Troy to her.
'How late you are,' she continued, tenderly. 'Did
you come by the carrier ? I listened and heard his
wheels entering the village, but it was some time ago,
and I had almost given you up, Frank.'
<P 288>
'I was sure to come,' said Frank. 'You knew I
should, did you not ? '
'Well, I thought you would,' she said, playfully ;
'and, Frank, it is so lucky .! There's not a soul in my
house but me to-night. I've packed them all off so
nobody on earth will know of your visit to your lady's
bower. Liddy wanted to go to her grandfather's to
tell him about her holiday, and I said she might stay
with them till to-morrow -- when you'll be gone again.'
'Capital,' said Troy. ' But, dear me, I. had better
go back for my bag, because my slippers and brush and
comb are in it; you run home whilst I fetch it, and I'll
promise to be in your parlour in ten minutes.'
'Yes.' She turned and tripped up the hill again.
During the progress of this dialogue there was a
nervous twitching of Boldwood's tightly closed lips, and
his face became bathed in a clammy dew. He now
started forward towards Troy. Troy turned to him and
took up the bag.
'Shall I tell her I have come to give her up and
cannot marry her ? ' said the soldier, mockingly.
'No, no; wait a minute. I want to say more to
you -- more to you !. ' said Boldwood, in a hoarse whisper.
'Now,' said Troy, ' you see my dilemma. Perhaps
I am a bad man -- the victim of my impulses -- led away
to do what I ought to leave undone. I can't, however,
marry them both. And I have two reasons for- choosing
Fanny. First, I like her best upon the whole, and
second, you make it worth my while.'
At the same instant Boldwood sprang upon him, and
held him by the neck. Troy felt Boldwood's grasp slowly
tightening. The move was absolutely unexpected.
'A moment,' he gasped. 'You are injuring her you
love .! '
'Well, what do you mean ? ' said the farmer.
Give me breath,' said Troy.
Boldwood loosened his hand, saying, 'By Heaven,
I've a mind to kill you .!'
'And ruin her.'
'Save her.'
'Oh, how can she be saved now, unless I marry her ? '
<P 289>
Boldwood groaned. He reluctantly released the
soldier, and flung him back against the hedge. 'Devil,
you torture me .! ' said he.
Troy rebounded like a ball, and was about to make
a dash at the farmer; but he checked himself, saying
lightly --
'It is not worth while to measure my strength with
you. Indeed it is a barbarous way of settling a quarrel.
I shall shortly leave the army because of the same
conviction. Now after that revelation of how the land
lies with Bathsheba, 'twould be a mistake to kill me,
would it not?'
''Twould be a mistake to kill you,' repeated Boldwood,
mechanically, with a bowed head.
'Better kill yourself.'
' Far better.'
'I'm glad you see it.'
'Troy, make her your wife, and don't act upon what
I arranged just now. The alternative is dreadful, but
take Bathsheba; I give her up .! She must love you
indeed to sell soul and body to you so utterly as she
has done. Wretched woman -- deluded woman -- you
are, Bathsheba .! '
'But about Fanny ? '
'Bathsheba is a woman well to do,' continued Bold+
wood, in nervous anxiety, 'and, Troy, she will make a
good wife ; and, indeed, she is worth your hastening
on your marriage with her .! '
'But she has a wili-not to say a temper, and I shall
be a mere slave to her. I could do anything with poor
Fanny Robin.'
'Troy,' said Boldwood, imploringly, ' I'll do anything
for you, only don't desert her; pray don't desert her,
Troy.'
'Which, poor Fanny ? '
'No ; Bathsheba Everdene. Love her best .! Love
her tenderly !. How shall I get you to see how advan+
tageous it will be to you to secure her at once ?'
'I don't wish to secure her in any new way.'
Boldwood's arm moved spasmodically towards Troy's
person again. He repressed the instinct, and his form
drooped as with pain.
Troy went on --
<P 290>
"I shall soon purchase my discharge, and then --  -- '
'But I wish you to hasten on this marriage !. It will
be better for you both. You love each other, and you
must let me help you to do it.'
'How ? '
'Why, by settling the five hundred on Bathsheba
instead of Fanny, to enable you to marry at once.
No ; she wouldn't have it of me. I'll pay it down to
you on the wedding-day.'
Troy paused in secret amazement at Boldwood's
wild infatuation. He carelessly said, 'And am I to
have anything now ? '
'Yes, if you wish to. But I have not much additional
money with me. I did not expect this; but all I have
is yours.'
Boldwood, more like a somnambulist than a wakeful
man, pulled out the large canvas bag he carried by way
of a purse, and searched it.
'I have twenty-one pounds more with me,' he said.
'Two notes and a sovereign. But before I leave you
I must have a paper signed --  -- '
'Pay me the money, and we'll go straight to her
parlour, and make any arrangement you please to secure
my compliance with your wishes. But she must know
nothing of this cash business.'
' Nothing, nothing,' said Boldwood, hastily. 'Here
is the sum, and if you'll come to my house we'll write
out the agreement for the remainder, and the terms
also.'
' First we'll call upon her.'
'But why? Come with me to-night, and go with
me to-morrow to the surrogate's.'
'But she must be consulted; at any rate informed.'
'Very well; go on.'
They went up the hill to Bathsheba's house. When
they stood at the entrance, Troy said, 'Wait here a
moment.' Opening the door, he glided inside, leaving
the door ajar.
Boldwood waited. In two minutes a light appeared
in the passage. Boldwood then saw that the chain
had been fastened across the door. Troy appeared
inside, carrying a bedroom candlestick.
<P 291>
'What, did you think I should break in ?' said
Boldwood, contemptuously.
'Oh, no; it is merely my humour to secure things.
Will you read this a moment ? I'll hold the light.'
Troy handed a folded newspaper through the slit
between door and doorpost, and put the candle close.
'That's the paragraph,' he said, placing his finger on
a line.
Boldwood looked and read --
'MARRIAGES.
'On the 17th inst., at St. Ambrose's Church, Bath,
by the Rev. G. Mincing, B.A., Francis Troy, only son
of the late Edward Troy, Esq., H.D., of Weatherbury,
and sergeant iith Dragoon Guards, to Bathsheba, only
surviving daughter of the late Mr, John Everdene, of
Casterbridge.'
'This may be called Fort meeting Feeble, hey,
Boldwood ?' said Troy. A low gurgle of derisive
laughter followed the words.
The paper fell from Boldwood's hands. Troy
continued --
'Fifty pounds to marry Fanny, Good. Twenty-+
one pounds not to marry Fanny, but Bathsheba. Good.
Finale : already Bathsheba's husband. Now, Boldwood,
yours is the ridiculous fate which always attends inter+
ference between a man and his wife. And another
word. Bad as I am, I am not such a villain as to
make the marriage or misery of any woman a matter
of huckster and sale. Fanny has long ago left me.
don't know where she is. I have searched everywhere.
Another word yet. You say you love Bathsheba ; yet
on the merest apparent evidence you instantly believe
in her dishonour. A fig for such love !. Now that I've
taught you a lesson, take your money back again.'
'I will not ; I will not !. ' said Boldwood, in a hiss.
'Anyhow I won't have it,' said Troy, contemptuously.
He wrapped the packet of gold in the notes, and threw
the whole into the road.
Boldwood shook his clenched fist at him. 'You
juggler of Satan .! You black hound .! But I'll punish
you yet ; mark me, I'll punish you yet !. '
<P 292>
Another peal of laughter. Troy then closed the
door, and locked himself in.
Throughout the whole of that night Boldwood's dark
downs of Weatherbury like an unhappy Shade in the
Mournful Fields by Acheron.
<C xxxv>
<P 293>
CHAPTER XXXV
AT AN UPPER WINDOW
IT was very early the next morning -- a time of sun and
dew. The confused beginnings of many birds' songs
spread into the healthy air, and the wan blue of the
heaven was here and there coated with thin webs of
incorporeal cloud which were of no efect in obscuring
day. All the lights in the scene were yellow as to
colour, and all the shadows were attenuated as to form.
The creeping plants about the old manor-house were
bowed with rows of heavy water drops, which had upon
objects behind them the effect of minute lenses of high
magnifying power.
Just before the clock struck five Gabriel Oak and
Coggan passed the village cross, and went on together
to the fields. They were yet barely in view of their
mistress"s house, when Oak fancied he saw the opening
of a casement in one of the upper windows. The two
men were at this moment partially screened by an elder
bush, now beginning to be enriched with black bunches
of fruit, and they paused before emerging from its
shade.
A handsome man leaned idly from the lattice. He
looked east and then west, in the manner of one who
makes a first morning survey. The man was Sergeant
Troy. His red jacket was loosely thrown on, but not
buttoned, and he had altogether the relaxed bearing of
a soldier taking his ease.
Coggan spoke first, looking quietly at the window.
'She has married him ! ' he said.
Gabriel had previously beheld the sight, and he now
stood with his back turned, making no reply.
'I fancied we should know something to-day,' con+
tinued Coggan. 'I heard wheels pass my door just
after dark -- you were out somewhere.'He glanced
round upon Gabriel. 'Good
<P 294>
heavens above us, Oak,
how white your face is; you look like a corpse !.'
'Do I?' said Oak, with a faint smile.
'Lean on the gate: I'll wait a bit.'
',All right, all right. '
They stood by the gate awhile, Gabriel listlessly
staring at the ground. His mind sped into the future,
and saw there enacted in years of leisure the scenes o
repentance that would ensue from this work of haste
That they were married he had instantly decided. Why
had it been so mysteriously managed ? It had become
known that she had had a fearful journey to Bath, owing
to her miscalculating the distance : that the horse had
broken down, and that she had been more than two
days getting there. It was not Bathsheba's way to do
things furtively. With all her faults, she was candour
itself. Could she have been entrapped ? The union
was not only an unutterable grief to him: it amazed
him, notwithstanding that he had passed the preceding
week in a suspicion that such might be the issue of
Troy's meeting her away from home. Her quiet return
with liddy had to some extent dispersed the dread.
Just as that imperceptible motion which appears like
stillness is infinitely divided in its properties from stili
ness itself, so had his hope undistinguishable from
despair differed from despair indeed.
In a few minutes they moved on again towards the
house. The sergeant still looked from the window.
'Morning, comrades .! ' he shouted, in a cheery voice,
when they came up.
Coggan replied to the greeting. ' Bain't ye going to
answer the man ?' he then said to Gabriel. 'I'd say
good morning -- you needn't spend a hapeth of meaning
upon it, and yet keep the man civil.'
Gabriel soon decided too that, since the deed was
done, to put the best face upon the matter would be the
greatest kindness to her he loved.
'Good morning, Sergeant Troy,' he returned, in a
ghastly voice.
'A rambling, gloomy house this,' said Troy, smiling.
<P 295>
' Why -- they may not be married .! ' suggested Coggan.
' Perhaps she's not there.'
Gabriel shook his head. The soldier turned a little
towards the east, and the sun kindled his scarlet coat
to an orange glow.
'But it is a nice old house,' responded Gabriel.
'Yes-i suppose so; but I feel like new wine in an
old bottle here. My notion is that sash-windows should
be put throughout, and these old wainscoted walls
brightened up a bit ; or the oak cleared quite away, and
the walls papered.'
'It would be a pity, I think.'
'Well, no. A philosopher once said in my hearing
that the old builders, who worked when art was a living
thing, had no respect for the work of builders who went
before them, but pulled down and altered as they
thought fit; and why shouldn't we ? ''Creation and
preservation don't do well together,'' says he, ''and a
million of antiquarians can't invent a style.'' My mind
exactly. I am for niaking this place more modern, that
we may be cheerful whilst we can.'
The military man turned and surveyed the interior
of the room, to assist his ideas of improvement in this
direction. Gabriel and Coggan began to move on.
' Oh, Coggan,' said Troy, as if inspired by a recollec+
tion ' do you know if insanity has ever appeared in Mr.
Boldwood's family ? '
Jan reflected for a moment.
'I once heard that an uncle of his was queer in his
head, but I don't know the rights o't,' he said.
'It is of no importance,' said Troy, lightly. 'Well,
I shall be down in the fields with you some time this
week ; but I have a few matters to attend to first. So
good-day to you. We shall, of course, keep on just as
friendly terms as usual. I'm not a proud man : nobody
is ever able to say that of Sergeant Troy. However,
what is must be, and here's half-a-crown to drink my
health, men.'
Troy threw the coin dexterously across the front plot
and over the fence towards Gabriel, who shunned it in
its fall, his face turning to an angry red. Coggan
twirled his eye, edged
<P 296>
forward, and caught the money
in its ricochet upon the road.
' very weli-you keep it, Coggan,' said Gabriel with
disdain and almost fiercely. 'As for me, I'll do with+
out gifts from him !'
'Don't show it too much,' said Coggan, musingly.
'For if he's married to her, mark my words, he'll buy
his discharge and be our master here. Therefore 'tis
well to say '' Friend '' outwardly, though you say
''Troublehouse '' within. '
' Weli-perhaps it is best to be silent; but I can't
go further than that. I can't flatter, and if my place
here is only to be kept by smoothing him down, my
place must be lost.'
A horseman, whom they had for some time seen in
the distance, now appeared close beside them.
' There's Mr. Boldwood,' said Oak. ' I wonder what
Troy meant by his question.'
Coggan and Oak nodded respectfully to the farmer,
just checked their paces to discover if they were wanted,
and finding they were not stood back to let him pass on.
The only signs of the terrible sorrow Boldwood had
been combating through the night, and was combating
now, were the want of colour in his welidefined face,
the enlarged appearance of the veins in his forehead
and temples, and the sharper lines about his mouth.
The horse bore him away, and the very step of the
animal seemed significant of dogged despair. Gabriel, for
a minute, rose above his own grief in noticing Boldwood's.
He saw the square figure sitting erect upon the horse,
the head turned to neither side, the elbows steady by
the hips, the brim of the hat level and undisturbed in
its onward glide, until the keen edges of Boldwood's
shape sank by degrees over the hill. To one who knew
the man and his story there was something more striking
in this immobility than in a collapse. The clash of
discord between mood and matter here was forced
painfully home to the heart ; and, as in laughter there are
more dreadful phases than in tears, so was there in the
steadiness of this agonized man an expression deeper
than a cry.
<C xxxvi>
<P 297>
WEALTH IN JEOPARDY -- THE RVEEL
ONE night, at the end of August, when Bathsheba's
experiences as a married woman were still new, and
when the weather was yet dry and sultry, a man stood
motionless in the stackyard of Weatherbury Upper
Farm, looking at the moon and sky.
The night had a sinister aspect. A heated breeze
from the south slowly fanned the summits of lofty
objects, and in the sky dashes of buoyant cloud were
sailing in a course at right angles to that of another
stratum, neither of them in the direction of the breeze
below. The moon, as seen through these films, had
a lurid metallic look. The fields were sallow with the
impure light, and all were tinged in monochrome, as
if beheld through stained glass. The same evening
the sheep had trailed homeward head to tail, the
behaviour of the rooks had heen confused, and the
horses had moved with timidity and caution.
Thunder was imminent, and, taking some secondary
appearances into consideration, it was likely to be
followed by one of the lengthened rains which mark
the close of dry weather for the season. Before twelve
hours had passed a harvest atmosphere would be a
bygone thing.
Oak gazed with misgiving at eight naked and un'
protected ricks, massive and heavy with the rich
produce of one-half the farm for that year. He went
on to the barn.
This was the night which had been selected by
Sergeant Troy -- ruling now in the room of his wife --
for giving the harvest supper and dance. As Oak
approached the building the sound of violins and a
tambourine, and the regular jigging of many feet, grew
more distinct. He came close to the large doors, one
of which stood slightly ajar, and looked in.
The central space, together with the recess at one
end, was
<P 298>
emptied of all incumbrances, and this area,
covering about two-thirds of the whole, was appropriated
for the gathering, the remaining end, which was piled
to the ceiling with oats, being screened off with sail'
cloth. Tufts and garlands of green foliage decomted
the walls, beams, and extemporized chandeliers, and
immediately opposite to Oak a rostrum had been
erected, bearing a table and chairs. Here sat three
fiddlers, and beside them stood a frantic man with his
hair on end, perspiration streaming down his cheeks,
and a tanabourine quivering in his hand.
The dance ended, and on the black oak floor in the
midst a new row of couples formed for another.
'Now, ma'am, and no offence I hope, I ask what
dance you would like next ?' said the first violin.
'Really, it makes no difference,' said the clear voice
of Bathsheba, who stood at the inner end of the build+
ing, observing the scene from behind a table covered
with cups and viands. Troy was lolling beside her.
'Then,' said the fiddler, 'I'll venture to name that
the right and proper thing is ''The Soldier's Joy'' --
there being a gallant soldier married into the farm --
hey, my sonnies, and gentlemen all ? '
'It shall be ''The Soldier's Joy,''' exclaimed a
chorus.
'Thanks for the compliment,' said the sergeant
THE REVEL
gaily, taking Bathsheba by the hand and leading her
to the top of the dance. 'For though I have pur+
chased my discharge from Her Most Gracious Majesty's
regiment of cavalry the 11th Dragoon Guards, to attend
to the new duties awaiting me here, I shall continue a
soldier in spirit and feeling as long as I live.'
So the dance began. As to the merits of 'The
Soldier's Joy,' there cannot be, and never were, two
opinions. It has been observed in the musical circles
of Weatherbury and its vicinity that this melody, at
the end of three-quarters of an hour of thunderous
footing, still possesses more stimulative properties for
the heel and toe than the majority of other dances at
their first opening. 'The Soldier's Joy' has, too, an
additional charm, in being so admirably adapted to
the tambourine aforesaid -- no mean instrument in the
hands of a performer
<P 299>
who understands the proper
convulsions, spasms, St. vitus's dances, and fearful
frenzies necessary when exhibiting its tones in their
highest perfection.
The immortal tune ended, a fine DD rolling forth
from the bass-viol with the sonorousness of a cannonade,
and Gabriel delayed his entry no longer. He avoided
Bathsheba, and got as near as possible to the platform,
where Sergeant Troy was now seated, drinking brandy+
and-water, though the others drank without exception
cider and ale. Gabriel could not easily thrust himself
within speaking distance of the sergeant, and he sent
a message, asking him to come down for a moment.
'The sergeant said he could not attend.
'Will you tell him, then,' said Gabriel, 'that I only
stepped ath'art to say that a heavy rain is sure to fall
soon, and that something should be done to protect
the ricks ?'
'M. Troy says it will not rain,' returned the
messenger, 'and he cannot stop to talk to you about
such fidgets.'
In Juxtaposition with Troy, Oak had a melancholy
tendency to look like a candle beside gas, and ill at
ease, he went out again, thinking he would go home ;
for, under the circumstances, he had no heart for the
scene in the barn. At the door he paused for a
moment : Troy was speaking.
'Friends, it is not only the harvest home that we
are celebrating to-night; but this is also a Wedding
Feast. A short time ago I had the happiness to lead
to the altar this lady, your mistress, and not until now
have we been able to give any public flourish to the
event in Weatherbury. That it may be thoroughly
well done, and that every man may go happy to bed,
I have ordered to be brought here some bottles of
brandy and kettles of hot water. A treble-strong
goblet will he handed round to each guest.'
Bathsheba put her hand upon his arm, and, with
upturned pale face, said imploringly, ' No -- don't give
it to them -- pray don't, Frank .! It will only do them
harm : they have had enough of everything.'
'True -- we don't wish for no more, thank ye,' said
one or two.
'Pooh .! ' said the sergeant contemptuously, and
raised his
<P 300>
voice as if lighted up by a new idea.
' Friends,' he said, ' we'll send the women-folk home .!
'Tis time they were in bed. Then we cockbirds will
have a jolly carouse to ourselves .! If any of the men
show the white feather, let them look elsewhere for a
winter's work.'
Bathsheba indignantly left the barn, followed by
all the women and children. The musicians, not
looking upon themselves as ' company,' slipped quietly
away to their spring waggon and put in the horse.
Thus Troy and the men on the farm were left sole
occupants of the place. Oak, not to appear unneces+
sarily disagreeable, stayed a little while ; then he, too,
arose and quietly took his departure, followed by a
friendly oath from the sergeant for not staying to a
second round of grog.
Gabriel proceeded towards his home. In approach+
ing the door, his toe kicked something which felt and
sounded soft, leathery, and distended, like a boxing+
glove. It was a large toad humbly travelling across
the path. Oak took it up, thinking it might be better
to kill the creature to save it from pain; but finding
it uninjured, he placed it again among the grass. He
knew what this direct message from the Great Mother
meant. And soon came another.
When he struck a light indoors there appeared upon
the table a thin glistening streak, as if a brush of varnish
had been lightly dragged across it. Oak's eyes followed
the serpentine sheen to the other side, where it led up
to a huge brown garden-slug, which had come indoors
to-night for reasons of its own. It was Nature's second
way of hinting to him that he was to prepare for foul
weather.
Oak sat down meditating for nearly an hour.
During this time two black spiders, of the kind common
in thatched houses, promenaded the ceiling, ultimately
dropping to the floor. This reminded him that if there
was one class of manifestation on this matter that he
thoroughly understood, it was the instincts of sheep.
He left the room, ran across two or three fields towards
the flock, got upon a hedge, and looked over among
them.
They were crowded close together on the other side
around some
<P 301>
furze bushes, and the first peculiarity ob+
servable was that, on the sudden appearance of Oak's
head over the fence, they did not stir or run away.
They had now a terror of something greater than their
terror of man. But this was not the most noteworthy
feature : they were all grouped in such a way that their
tails, without a single exception, were towards that half
of the horizon from which the storm threatened. There
was an inner circle closely huddled, and outside these
they radiated wider apart, the pattern formed by the
flock as a whole not being unlike a vandyked lace
collar, to which the clump of furze-bushes stood in the
position of a wearer's neck.
opinion. He knew now that he was right, and that
Troy was wrong. Every voice in nature was unanimous
in bespeaking change. But two distinct translations
attached to these dumb expressions. Apparently there
was to be a thunder-storm, and afterwards a cold con+
tinuous rain. The creeping things seemed to know all
about the later rain, hut little of the interpolated
thunder-storm ; whilst the sheep knew all about the
thunder-storm and nothing of the later rain.
This complication of weathers being uncommon,
was all the more to be feared. Oak returned to the
stack-yard. All was silent here, and the conical tips of
the ricks jutted darkly into the sky. There were five
wheat-ricks in this yard, and three stacks of barley.
The wheat when threshed would average about thirty
quarters to each stack ; the barley, at least forty. Their
value to Bathsheba, and indeed to anybody, Oak
mentally estimated by the following simple calcula+
tion : --
5 x 30 = 150 quarters= 500fl.
3 x 40=120 quarters= 250l.
Total . . 750l.
Seven hundred and fifty pounds in the divinest form
that money can wear -- that of necessary food for man
and beast : should the risk be run cf deteriorating this
bulk of corn to less than half its value, because of the
instability of a woman ? 'Never, if I can prevent it.! '
said Gabriel.
<P 302>
Such was the argument that Oak set outwardly before
him. But man, even to himself, is a palimpsest, having
an ostensible writing, and another beneath the lines.
It is possible that there was this golden legend under
the utilitarian one: 'I will help to my last effort the
woman I have loved so dearly.'
He went back to the barn to endeavour to obtain
assistance for covering the ricks that very
<P 303>
night. All
was silent within, and he would have passed on in the
belief that the party had broken up, had not a dim
light, yellow as saffron by contrast with the greenish
whiteness outside, streamed through a knot-hole in the
folding doors.
Gabriel looked in. An unusual picture met his
eye.
The candles suspended among the evergreens had
burnt down to their sockets, and in some cases the
leaves tied about them were scorched. Many of the
lights had quite gone out, others smoked and stank,
grease dropping from them upon the floor. Here,
under the table, and leaning against forms and chairs
in every conceivable attitude except the perpendicular, !'
were the wretched persons of all the work-folk, the hair
of their heads at such low levels being suggestive of
mops and brooms. In the midst of these shone red
and distinct the figure of Sergeant Troy, leaning back
in a chair. Coggan was on his back, with his mouth
open, huzzing forth snores, as were several others ; the
united breathings of the horizonal assemblage forming
a subdued roar like London from a distance. Joseph
Poorgrass was curled round in the fashion of a hedge+
hog, apparently in attempts to present the least possible
portion of his surface to the air; and behind him was
dimly visible an unimportant remnant of William Smali
bury. The glasses and cups still stood upon the table,
a water-jug being overturned, from which a small rill,
after tracing its course with marvellous precision down
the centre of the long table, fell into the neck of the
unconscious Mark Clark, in a steady, monotonous drip,
like the dripping of a stalactite in a cave.
Gabriel glanced hopelessly at the group, which, with
one or two exceptions, composed all the able-bodied
men upon the farm. He saw at once that if the ricks
were to be saved that night, or even the next morning,
he must save them with his own hands.
A faint ' ting-ting ' resounded from under Coggan's
waistcoat. It was Coggan's watch striking the hour of
two.
Oak went to the recumbent form of Matthew Moon,
who usually undertook the rough thatching of the home+
stead, and shook him. The shaking was without effect.
Gabriel shouted in his ear, ' where's your thatching+
beetle and rick-stick and spars ? '
' Under the staddles,' said Moon, mechanically, with
the unconscious promptness of a medium.
Gabriel let go his head, and it dropped upon the
floor like a bowl. He then went to Susan Tall's
husband.
' where's the key of the granary ? '
No answer. The question was repeated, with the
same result. To be shouted to at night was evidently
less of a novelty to Susan Tall's husband than to
Matthew Moon. Oak flung down Tall's head into the
corner again and turned away.
To be just, the men were not greatly to blame for
this painful and demoralizing termination to the
evening's entertainment. Sergeant Troy had so strenu+
ously insisted, glass in hand, that drinking should be
the bond of their union, that those who wished to refuse
hardly liked to be so unmannerly under the circum+
stances. Having from their youth up been entirely un+
accustomed to any liquor stronger than cider or mild
ale, it was no wonder that they had succumbed, one
and all, with extraordinary uniformity, after the lapse of
about an hour.
Gabriel was greatly depressed. This debauch boded
ill for that wilful and fascinating mistress whom the
faithful man even now felt within him as the embodi+
ment of all that was sweet and bright and hopeless.
He put out the expiring lights, that the barn might
not be endangered, closed the door upon the men in
their deep and oblivious sleep, and went again into the
lone night. A hot breeze, as if breathed from the
parted lips of some dragon about to swallow the globe,
fanned him from the south, while directly opposite in
the north rose a grim misshapen body of
<P 304>
cloud, in the
very teeth of the wind. So unnaturally did it rise that
one could fancy it to be lifted by machinery from below.
Meanwhile the faint cloudlets had flown back into the
south-east corner of the sky, as if in terror of the large
cloud, like a young brood gazed in upon by some
monster.
Going on to the village, Oak flung a small stone
against the window of Laban Tall's bedroom, expecting
Susan to open it ; but nobody stirred. He went round
to the back door, which had been left unfastened for
Laban's entry, and passed in to the foot of the stair+
case.
'Mrs. Tall, I've come for the key of the granary,
to get at the rick-cloths,' said Oak, in a stentorian
voice.
'Is that you ? ' said Mrs. Susan Tall, half awake.
' Yes,' said Gabriel.
'Come along to bed, do, you drawlatching rogue --
keeping a body awake like this .'
'It isn't Laban -- 'tis Gabriel Oak. I want the key
of the granary.'
'Gabriel. what in the name of fortune did you
pretend to be Laban for ?'
' I didn't. I thought you meant --  -- '
'yes you did !. what do you want here ?'
'The key of the granary.'
"Take it then. 'Tis on the nail. People coming
disturbing women at this time of night ought --  -- '
Gabriel took the key, without waiting to hear the
conclusion of the tirade. Ten minutes later his lonely
figure might have been seen dragging four large water+
proof coverings across the yard, and soon two of these
heaps of treasure in grain were covered snug -- two cloths
to each. Two hundred pounds were secured. Three
wheat-stacks remained open, and there were no more
cloths. Oak looked under the staddles and found a
fork. He mounted the third pile of wealth and began
operating, adopting the plan of sloping the upper
sheaves one over the other; and, in addition, filling
the interstices with the material of some untied sheaves.
So far all was well. By this hurried contrivance
Bathsheba's
<P 305>
property in wheat was safe for at any rate
a week or two, provided always that there was not
much wind.
Next came the barley. This it was only possible to
protect by systematic thatching. Time went on, and
the moon vanished not to reappear. It was the
farewell of the ambassador previous to war. The
night had a haggard look, like a sick thing; and there
came finally an utter expiration of air from the whole
heaven in the form of a slow breeze, which might have
been likened to a death. And now nothing was heard
in the yard but the dull thuds of the beetle which drove
in the spars, and the rustle of thatch in the intervals.
THE STORM
<C xxxvii>
<P 306>
THE STORM -- THE TWO TOGETHER
A LIGHT flapped over the scene, as if reflected from
phosphorescent wings crossing the sky, and a rumble
filled the air. It was the first move of the approaching
storm.
The second peal was noisy, with comparatively little
visible lightning. Gabriel saw a candle shining in Bath+
sheba's bedroom, and soon a shadow swept to and fro
upon the blind.
Then there came a third flash. Manoeuvres of a
most extraordinary kind were going on in the vast
firmamental hollows overhead. The lightning now was
the colour of silver, and gleamed in the heavens like a
mailed army. Rumbles became rattles. Gabriel from
his elevated position could see over the landscape at
least half-a-dozen miles in front. Every hedge, bush,
and tree was distinct as in a line engraving. In a
paddock in the same direction was a herd of heifers,
and the forms of these were visible at this moment in
the act of galloping about in the wildest and maddest
confusion, flinging their heels and tails high into the air,
their heads to earth. A poplar in the immediate fore+
ground was like an ink stroke on burnished tin. Then
the picture vanished, leaving the darkness so intense
that Gabriel worked entirely by feeling with his hands.
He had stuck his ricking-rod, or poniard, as it was
indifferently called -- a long iron lance, polished by
handling -- into the stack, used to support the sheaves
instead of the support called a groom used on houses,
A blue light appeared in the zenith, and in some in+
describable manner flickered down near the top of the
rod. It was the fourth of the larger flashes. A moment
later and there was a smack -- smart, clear, and short,
Gabriel felt his position to be anything but a safe one,
and he resolved to descend.
Not a drop of rain had fallen as yet. He wiped his
weary brow, and looked again at the black forms of
the unprotected
<P 307>
stacks. Was his life so valuable to
him after all? What were his prospects that he
should be so chary of running risk, when important
and urgent labour could not be carried on without
such risk ? He resolved to stick to the stack. How+
ever, he took a precaution. Under the staddles was
a long tethering chain, used to prevent the escape of
errant horses. This he carried up the ladder, and
sticking his rod through the clog at one end, allowed
the other end of the chain to trail upon the ground
The spike attached to it he drove in. Under the
shadow of this extemporized lightning-conductor he
felt himself comparatively safe.
Before Oak had laid his hands upon his tools again
out leapt the fifth flash, with the spring of a serpent
and the shout of a fiend. It was green as an
emerald, and the reverberation was stunning. What
was this the light revealed to him? In the open
ground before him, as he looked over the ridge of
the rick, was a dark and apparently female form.
Could it be that of the only venturesome woman in
the parish -- Bathsheba ? The form moved on a step :
then he could see no more.
"Is that you, ma'am ? ' said Gabriel to the darkness.
"Who is there ?' said the voice of Bathsheba,
THE TWO TOGETHER
"Gabriel. I am on the rick, thatching.'
"O, Gabriel ! -- and are you ? I have come about
them. The weather awoke me, and I thought of the
corn. I am so distressed about it -- can we save it any+
how ? I cannot find my husband. Is he with you ?'
"He is not here.'
"Do you know where he is ?'
"Asleep in the barn.'
"He promised that the stacks should be seen to,
and now they are all neglected ! Can I do anything
to help ? Liddy is afraid to come out. Fancy finding
you here at such an hour ! Surely I can do something ? '
"You can bring up some reed-sheaves to me, one by
one, ma'am; if you are not afraid to come up the ladder
in the dark,' said Gabriel. "Every moment is precious
now, and that would save a good deal of time. It is
not very dark when the lightning has been gone a bit.'
<P 308>
"I'll do anything ! ' she said, resolutely. She instantly
took a sheaf upon her shoulder, clambered up close to
his heels, placed it behind the rod, and descended for
another. At her third ascent the rick suddenly brightened
with the brazen glare of shining majolica -- every knot
in every straw was visible. On the slope in front of him
appeared two human shapes, black as jet. The rick
lost its sheen -- -the shapes vanished. Gabriel turned his
head. It had been the sixth flash which had come from
the east behind him, and the two dark forms on the
slope had been the shadows of himself and Bathsheba.
Then came the peal. It hardly was credible that
such a heavenly light could be the parent of such a
diabolical sound.
"How terrible ! ' she exclaimed, and clutched him by
the sleeve. Gabriel turned, and steadied her on her
aerial perch by holding her arm. At the same moment,
while he was still reversed in his attitude, there was
more light, and he saw, as it were, a copy of the tall
poplar tree on the hill drawn in black on the wall of
the barn. It was the shadow of that tree, thrown across
by a secondary flash in the west.
The next flare came. Bathsheba was on the ground
now, shouldering another sheaf, and she bore its dazzle
without flinching -- thunder and ali-and again ascended
with the load. There was then a silence everywhere
for four or five minutes, and the crunch of the spars,
as Gabriel hastily drove them in, could again be distinctly
heard. He thought the crisis of the storm had passed.
But there came a burst of light.
"Hold on ! ' said Gabriel, taking the sheaf from her
shoulder, and grasping her arm again.
Heaven opened then, indeed. The flash was almost
too novel for its inexpressibly dangerous nature to be
at once realized, and they could only comprehend the
magnificence of its beauty. It sprang from east, west,
north, south, and was a perfect dance of death. The
forms of skeletons appeared in the air, shaped with
blue fire for bones -- dancing, leaping, striding, racing
around, and mingling altogether in unparalleled con+
fusion. With these were intertwined undulating snakes of
green, and behind these was a broad mass of lesser light.
Simultaneously came from every part of the tumbling
<P 309>
sky what may be called a shout ; since, though no shout
ever came near it, it was more of the nature of a shout
than of anything eise earthly. In the meantime one of
the grisly forms had alighted upon the point of Gabriel's
rod, to run invisibly down it, down the chain, and into
the earth. Gabriel was almost blinded, and he could
feel Bathsheba's warm arm tremble in his hand -- a
sensation novel and thrilling enough ; but love, life,
everything human, seemed small and trifling in such
close juxtaposition with an infuriated universe.
Oak had hardly time to gather up these impressions
into a thought, and to see how strangely the red feather
of her hat shone in this light, when the tall tree on the
hill before mentioned seemed on fire to a white heat,
and a new one among these terrible voices mingled with
the last crash of those preceding. It was a stupefying
blast, harsh and pitiless, and it fell upon their ears in a
dead, flat blow, without that reverberation which lends
the tones of a drum to more distant thunder. By the
lustre reflected from every part of the earth and from the
wide domical scoop above it, he saw that the tree was
sliced down the whole length of its tall, straight stem, a
huge riband of bark being apparently flung off. The
other portion remained erect, and revealed the bared
surface as a strip of white down the front. The
lightning had struck the tree. A sulphurous smell
filled the air; then all was silent, and black as a cave
in Hinnom.
" We had a narrow escape ! ' said Gabriel, hurriedly.
" You had better go down.'
Bathsheba said nothing ; but he could distinctly hear
her rhythmical pants, and the recurrent rustle of the
sheaf beside her in response to her frightened pulsations.
She descended the ladder, and, on second thoughts, he
followed her. The darkness was now impenetrable by
the sharpest vision. They both stood still at the
bottom, side by side. Bathsheba appeared to think
only of the weather -- Oak thought only of her just then.
At last he said --
"The storm seems to have passed now, at any
rate.'
" I think so too,' said Bathsheba. " Though there
are multitudes of gleams, look ! '
<P 310>
The sky was now filled with an incessant light,
frequent repetition melting into complete continuity, as
an unbroken sound results from the successive strokes
on a gong.
" Nothing serious,' said he. " I cannot understand
no rain falling. But Heaven be praised, it is all the
better for us. I am now going up again.'
" Gabriel, you are kinder than I deserve ! I will stay
and help you yet. O, why are not some of the others
here ! '
" They would have been here if they could,' said Oak,
in a hesitating way.
'O, I know it ali-all,' she said, adding slowly :
" They are all asleep in the barn, in a drunken sleep, and
my husband among them. That's it, is it not ? Don't
think I am a timid woman and can't endure things.'
"I am not certain,' said Gabriel. 'I will go and see,'
He crossed to the barn, leaving her there alone. He
looked through the chinks of the door. All was in
total darkness, as he had left it, and there still arose, as
at the former time, the steady buzz of many snores.
He felt a zephyr curling about his cheek, and turned.
It was Bathsheba's breath -- she had followed him, and
was looking into the same chink.
He endeavoured to put off the immediate and pain+
ful subject of their thoughts by remarking gently, "lf
you'll come back again, miss -- ma'am, and hand up a
few more; it would save much time.'
Then Oak went back again, ascended to the top,
stepped off the ladder for greater expedition, and went
on thatching. She followed, but without a sheaf
" Gabriel,' she said, in a strange and impressive voice.
Oak looked up at her. She had not spoken since
he left the barn. The soft and continual shimmer of
the dying lightning showed a marble face high against
the black sky of the opposite quarter. Bathsheba was
sitting almost on the apex of the stack, her feet gathered
up beneath her, and resting on the top round of the
ladder.
" Yes, mistress,' he said.
<P 311>
"I suppose you thought that when I galloped away
to Bath that night it was on purpose to be married ?"
'I did at last -- not at first,' he answered, somewhat
surprised at the abruptness with which this new subject
was broached.
" And others thought so, too ? '
" Yes.'
"And you blamed me for it ?'
" Weli-a little.'
"I thought so. Now, I care a little for your good
opinion, and I want to explain something-i have
longed to do it ever since I returned, and you looked so
gravely at me. For if I were to die -- and I may die
soon -- it would be dreadful that you should always think
mistakenly of me. Now, listen.'
Gabriel ceased his rustling.
'I went to Bath that night in the full intention of
breaking off my engagement to Mr. Troy. It was owing
to circumstances which occurred after I got there that
 -- that we were married. Now, do you see the matter
in a new light?'
" I do -- somewhat.'
" I must, I suppose, say more, now that I have
begun. And perhaps it's no harm, for you are certainly
under no delusion that I ever loved you, or that I can
have any object in speaking, more than that object I
have mentioned. Well, I was alone in a strange city,
and the horse was lame. And at last I didn't know
what to do. I saw, when it was too late, that scandal
might seize hold of me for meeting him alone in that
way. But I was coming away, when he suddenly said
he had that day seen a woman more beautiful than I,
and that his constancy could not be counted on unless
I at once became his.... And I was grieved and
troubled --  -- ' She cleared her voice, and waited a
moment, as if to gather breath. " And then, between
jealousy and distraction, I married him ! ' she whispered
with desperate impetuosity.
Gabriel made no reply.
"He was not to blame, for it was perfectly true about
 -- about his seeing somebody else,' she quickly added.
"And now I don't wish for a single remark from you
upon the subject --
<P 312>
indeed, I forbid it. I only wanted
you to know that misunderstood bit of my history before
a time comes when you could never know it. -- You want
some more sheaves ? '
She went down the ladder, and the work proceeded.
Gabriel soon perceived a languor in the movements of
his mistress up and down, and he said to her, gently as
a mother --
"I think you had better go indoors now, you are
tired. I can finish the rest alone. If the wind does
not change the rain is likely to keep off.'
"If I am useless I will go,' said Bathsheba, in a
flagging cadence. 'But O, if your life should be lost !'
" You are not useless; but I would rather not tire
you longer. You have done well.'
"And you better ! ' she said, gratefully. ! Thank you
for your devotion, a thousand times, Gabriel ! Good+
night-i know you are doing your very best for me.'
She diminished in the gloom, and vanished, and he
heard the latch of the gate fall as she passed through.
He worked in a reverie now, musing upon her story, and
upon the contradictoriness of that feminine heart which
had caused her to speak more warmly to him to-night
than she ever had done whilst unmarried and free to
speak as warmly as she chose.
He was disturbed in his meditation by a grating
noise from the coach-house. It was the vane on the
roof turning round, and this change in the wind was the
signal for a disastrous rain.
RAIN
<C xxxviii>
<P 313>
RAIN -- ONE SOLITARY MEETS ANOTHER
IT was now five o'clock, and the dawn was promising
to break in hues of drab and ash.
The air changed its temperature and stirred itself
more vigorously. Cool breezes coursed in transparent
eddies round Oak's face. The wind shifted yet a point
or two and blew stronger. In ten minutes every wind
of heaven seemed to be roaming at large. Some of the
thatching on the wheat-stacks was now whirled fantas+
tically aloft, and had to be replaced and weighted with
some rails that lay near at hand. This done, Oak slaved
away again at the barley. A huge drop of rain smote
his face, the wind snarled round every corner, the trees
rocked to the bases of their trunks, and the twigs clashed
in strife. Driving in spars at any point and on any
system, inch by inch he covered more and more safely
from ruin this distracting impersonation of seven hundred
pounds. 'The rain came on in earnest, and Oak soon felt
the water to be tracking cold and clammy routes down
his back. Ultimately he was reduced welinigh to a
homogeneous sop, and the dyes of his clothes trickled
down and stood in a pool at the foot of the ladder.
The rain stretched obliquely through the dull atmo+
sphere in liquid spines, unbroken in continuity between
their beginnings in the clouds and their points in him.
Oak suddenly remembered that eight months before
this time he had been fighting against fire in the same
spot as desperately as he was fighting against water
now -- and for a futile love of the same woman. As for
her --  --  But Oak was generous and true, and dis+
missed his reflections.
It was about seven o'clock in the dark leaden
morning when Gabriel came down from the last stack,
and thankfully exclaimed, "It is done .! ' He was
<P 314>
drenched, weary, and sad, and yet not so sad as drenched
and weary, for he was cheered by a sense of success in
a good cause.
Faint sounds came from the barn, and he looked
that way. Figures stepped singly and in pairs through
the doors -- all walking awkwardly, and abashed, save
the foremost, who wore a red jacket, and advanced
with his hands in his pockets, whistling. The others
shambled after with a conscience-stricken air : the whole
procession was not unlike Flaxman's group of the suitors
tottering on towards the infernal regions under the
conduct of Mercury. The gnarled shapes passed into
the village, Troy, their leader, entering the farmhouse.
Not a single one of them had turned his face to the
ricks, or apparently bestowed one thought upon their
condition.
Soon Oak too went homeward, by a different route
from theirs. In front of him against the wet glazed
surface of the lane he saw a person walking yet more
slowly than himself under an umbrella. The man
turned and plainly started; he was Boldwood.
" How are you this morning, sir ?' said Oak.
"Yes, it is a wet day. -- Oh, I am well, very well, I
thank you ; quite well.'
"I am glad to hear it, sir.'
Boldwood seemed to awake to the present by degrees.
" You look tired and ill, Oak,' he said then, desultorily
regarding his companion.
" I am tired. You look strangely altered, sir.'
"I? Not a bit of it : I am well enough. What put
that into your head ?'
"I thought you didn't look quite so topping as you
used to, that was all.'
" Indeed, then you are mistaken,' said Boldwood,
shortly. "Nothing hurts me. My constitution is an
iron one.'
"I've been working hard to get our ricks covered,
and was barely in time. Never had such a struggle in
my life.... Yours of course are safe, sir.'
" O yes.' Boldwood added, after an interval of
silence : " What did you ask, Oak ? '
" Your ricks are all covered before this time ? '
<P 315>
"No.'
" At any rate, the large ones upon the stone staddles ?'
" They are not.'
"Them under the hedge ?'
" No. I forgot to tell the thatcher to set about it.'
" Nor the little one by the stile ?'
"Nor the little one by the stile. I overlooked the
ricks this year.'
'Then not a tenth of your corn will come to measure,
sir.'
" Possibly not.
" Overlooked them,' repeated Gabriel slowly to him+
self. It is difficult to describe the intensely dramatic
effect that announcement had upon Oak at such a
moment. All the night he had been feeling that the
neglect he was labouring to repair was abnormal and
isolated -- the only instance of the kind within the circuit
of the county. Yet at this very time, within the same
parish, a greater waste had been going on, uncomplained
of and disregarded. A few months earlier Boldwood's
forgetting his husbandry would have been as preposter+
ous an idea as a sailor forgetting he was in a ship. Oak
was just thinking that whatever he himself might have
suffered from Bathsheba's marriage, here was a man
who had suffered more, when Boldwood spoke in a
changed voice -- that of one who yearned to make a
confidence and relieve his heart by an outpouring.
"Oak, you know as well as I that things have gone
wrong with me lately. I may as well own it. I was
going to get a little settled in life; but in some way my
plan has come to nothing.'
"I thought my mistress would have married you,'
said Gabriel, not knowing enough of the full depths of
Boldwood's love to keep silence on the farmer's account,
and determined not to evade discipline by doing so on
his own. 'However, it is so sometimes, and nothing
happens that we expect,' he added, with the repose of
a man whom misfortune had inured rather than sub+
dued.
'I daresay I am a joke about the parish,' said Bold+
wood, as if the subject came irresistibly to his tongue,
and with a miserable lightness meant to express his
indifference.
<P 316>
" O no -- I don't think that.'
 -- But the real truth of the matter is that there was
not, as some fancy, any jilting on -- her part. No
engagement ever existed between me and Miss Ever+
dene. People say so, but it is untrue: she never
promised me .! ' Boldwood stood still now and turned
his wild face to Oak. 'O, Gabriel,' he continued, "I
am weak and foolish, and I don't know what, and I
can't fend off my miserable grief ! ... I had some faint
belief in the mercy of God till I lost that woman. Yes,
He prepared a gourd to shade me, and like the prophet
I thanked Him and was glad. But the next day He
prepared a worm to smite the gourd and wither it; and
I feel it is better to die than to live.!"
A silence followed. Boldwood aroused himself from
the momentary mood of confidence into which he had
drifted, and walked on again, resuming his usual reserve,
" No, Gabriel,' he resumed, with a carelessness which
was like the smile on the countenance of a skull: "it
was made more of by other people than ever it was by
us. I do feel a little regret occasionally, but no woman
ever had power over me for any length of time. Well,
good morning ; I can trust you not to mention to others
what has passed between us two here.'
<C xxxix>
<P 317>
COMING HOME -- A CRY
ON the turnpke road, between Casterbridge and
Weatherbury, and about three miles from the former
which pervade the highways of this undulating part of
South Wessex. I returning from market it is usual
for the farmers and other gig-gentry to alight at the
bottom and walk up.
One Saturday evening in the month of October
Bathsheba's vehicle was duly creeping up this incline.
She was sitting listlessly in the second seat of the gig,
whilst walking beside her in farmer's marketing suit
of unusually fashionable cut was an erect, welimade
young man. Though on foot, he held the reins and
whip, and occasionally aimed light cuts at the horse's
ear with the end of the lash, as a recreation. This
man was her husband, formerly Sergeant Troy, who,
having bought his discharge with Bathsheba's money,
was gradually transforming himself into a farmer of a
spirited and very modern school. People of unalter+
able ideas still insisted upon calling him 'Sergeant'
when they met him, which was in some degree owing
to his having still retained the welishaped moustache
of his military days, and the soldierly bearing insepar+
able from his form and training.
"Yes, if it hadn't been for that wretched rain I
should have cleared two hundred as easy as looking,
my love,' he was saying. "Don't you see, it altered
all the chances? To speak like a book I once read,
wet weather is the narrative, and fine days are the
episodes, of our country's history; now, isn't that
true?'
' But the time of year is come for changeable weather.'
"Well, yes. The fact is, these autumn races are the
ruin of everybody. Never did I see such a day as 'twas .!
'Tis a wild open place, just out of Budmouth, and a
drab sea rolled in
<P 318>
towards us like liquid misery. Wind
and rain -- good Lord !. Dark ? Why, 'twas as black
as my hat before the last race was run. 'Twas five
o'clock, and you couldn't see the horses till they were
almost in, leave alone colours. The ground was as
heavy as lead, and all judgment from a fellow's experi+
ence went for nothing. Horses, riders, people, were
all blown about like ships at sea. Three booths were
blown over, and the wretched folk inside crawled out
upon their hands and knees; and in the next field
were as many as a dozen hats at one time. Aye,
Pimpernel regularly stuck fast, when about sixty yards
off, and when I saw Policy stepping on, it did knock
my heart against the lining of my ribs, I assure you,
my love.!'
" And you mean, Frank,' said Bathsheba, sadly --
her voice was painfully lowered from the fulness and
vivacity of the previous summer -- "that you have lost
more than a hundred pounds in a month by this
dreadful horse-racing ? O, Frank, it is cruel; it is
foolish of you to take away my money so. We shall
have to leave the farm; that will be the end of it !.'
' Humbug about cruel. Now, there 'tis again --
turn on the waterworks ; that's just like you.'
"But you'll promise me not to go to Budmouth
second meeting, won't you ? ' she implored. Bathsheba
was at the full depth for tears, but she maintained a
dry eye.
"I don't see why I should; in fact, if it turns out to
be a fine day, I was thinking of taking you.'
"Never, never.! I'll go a hundred miles the other
way first. I hate the sound of the very word.!'
"But the question of going to see the race or staying
at home has very little to do with the matter. Bets are
all booked safely enough before the race begins, you
may depend. Whether it is a bad race for me or a
good one, will have very little to do with our going
there next Monday.'
"But you don't mean to say that you have risked
anything on this one too .! ' she exclaimed, with an
agonized look.
"There now, don't you be a little fool. Wait till you
are told. Why, Bathsheba, you have lost all the pluck
and sauciness you formerly had, and upon my life if I
had known what a
<P 319>
chicken-hearted creature you were
under all your boldness, I'd never have-i know what.'
A flash of indignation might have been seen in
Bathsheba's dark eyes as she looked resolutely ahead
after this reply. They moved on without further
speech, some early-withered leaves from the trees which
hooded the road at this spot occasionally spinning
downward across their path to the earth.
A woman appeared on the brow of the hill. The
ridge was in a cutting, so that she was very near the
husband and wife before she became visible. Troy had
turned towards the gig to remount, and whilst putting
his foot on the step-the woman passed behind him.
Though the overshadowing trees and the approach
of eventide enveloped them in gloom, Bathsheba could
see plainly enough to discern the extreme poverty of
the woman's garb, and the sadness of her face.
"Please, sir, do you know at what time Casterbridge
Union-house closes at night ? '
A CRY
The woman said these words to Troy over his
shoulder.
Troy started visibly at the sound of the voice; yet
he seemed to recover presence of mind sufficient to
prevent himself from giving way to his impulse to
suddenly turn and face her. He said, slowly --
" I don't know."
The woman, on hearing him speak, quickly looked
up, examined the side of his face, and recognized the
soldier under the yeoman's garb. Her face was drawn
into an expression which had gladness and agony both
among its elements. She uttered an hysterical cry,
and fell down.
" O, poor thing.!' exclaimed Bathsheba, instantly
preparing to alight.
"Stay where you are, and attend to the horse!'
said Troy, peremptorily throwing her the reins and
the whip. "Walk the horse to the top: I'll see to
the woman.'
" But i -- -'
" Do you hear? Clk -- Poppet.!'
<P 320>
The horse, gig, and Bathsheba moved on.
"How on earth did you come here? I thought
you were miles away, or dead.! Why didn't you
write to me?' said Troy to the woman, in a strangely
gentle, yet hurried voice, as he lifted her up.
" I feared to."
'Have you any money?'
"None."
"Good Heaven -- I wish I had more to give you!.
Here's  --  wretched  --  the merest trifle. It is every
farthing I have left. I have none but what my wife
gives me, you know, and I can't ask her now.'
The woman made no answer.
"I have only another moment,' continued Troy;
'and now listen. Where are you going to-night?
Casterbridge Union?'
"Yes; I thought to go there.'
" You shan't go there; yet, wait. Yes, perhaps for
to-night ; I can do nothing better -- worse luck.! Sleep
there to-night, and stay there to-morrow. Monday is
the first free day I have; and on Monday morning,
at ten exactly, meet me on Grey's Bridge just out of the
town. I'll bring all the money I can muster. You
shan't want-i'll see that, Fanny; then I'll get you a
lodging somewhere. Good-bye till then. I am a brute
 -- but good-bye.!'
After advancing the distance which completed the
ascent of the hill, Bathsheba turned her head. The
woman was upon her feet, and Bathsheba saw her
withdrawing from Troy, and going feebly down the
hill by the third milestone from Casterbridge. Troy
then came on towards his wife, stepped into the gig,
took the reins from her hand, and without making any
observation whipped the horse into a trot. He was
rather agitated.
"Do you know who that woman was?' said Bath+
sheba, looking searchingly into his face.
"I do,' he said, looking boldly back into hers.
"I thought you did,' said she, with angry hauteur,
and still regarding him. " Who is she?'
<P 321>
He suddenly seemed to think that frankness would
benefit neither of the women.
'Nothing to either of us,' he said. "I know her
by sight."
'What is her name?'
"How should I know her name ?'
"I think you do.'
"Think if you will, and be --  -- " The sentence was
completed by a smart cut of the whip round Poppet's
flank, which caused the animal to start forward at a
wild pace. No more was said.
ON CASTERBRIDGE HIGHWAY
<C xl>
<P 322>
FOR a considerable time the woman walked on. Her
steps became feebler, and she strained her eyes to look
afar upon the naked road, now indistinct amid the
penumbrae of night. At length her onward walk
dwindled to the merest totter, and she opened a gate
within which was a haystack. Underneath this she sat
down and presently slept.
When the woman awoke it was to find herself in the
depths of a moonless and starless night. A heavy un+
broken crust of cloud stretched across the sky, shutting
out every speck of heaven ; and a distant halo which
hung over the town of Casterbridge was visible against
the black concave, the luminosity appearing the
brighter by its great contrast with the circumscribing
darkness. Towards this weak, soft glow the woman
turned her eyes.
"If I could only get there.!' she said. "Meet him
the day after to-morrow: God help me! Perhaps I
shall be in my grave before then.'
A manor-house clock from the far depths of shadow
struck the hour, one, in a small, attenuated tone. After
midnight the voice of a clock seems to lose in breadth
as much as in length, and to diminish its sonorousness
to a thin falsetto.
Afterwards a light -- two lights -- arose frona the re+
mote shade, and grew larger. A carriage rolled along
the toad, and passed the gate. It probably contained
some late diners-out. The beams from one lamp shone
for a moment upon the crouching woman, and threw
her face into vivid relieff. The face was young in the
groundwork, old in the finish ; the general contours
were flexuous and childlike, but the finer lineaments
had begun to be sharp and thin.
The pedestrian stood up, apparently with revived
determination, and looked around. The road appeared
to be
<P 323>
familiar to her, and she carefully scanned the fence
as she slowly walked along. Presently there became
visible a dim white shape; it was another milestone.
She drew her fingers across its face to feel the marks.
"Two more!' she said.
She leant against the stone as a means of rest for a
 short interval, then bestirred herself, and again pursued
her way. For a slight distance she bore up bravely,
afterwards flagging as before. This was beside a lone
copsewood, wherein heaps of white chips strewn upon
the leafy ground showed that woodmen had been
faggoting and making hurdles during the day. Now
there was not a rustle, not a breeze, not the faintest
clash of twigs to keep her company. The woman
looked over the gat, opened it, and went in. Close
to the entrance stood a row of faggots, bound and un+
bound, together with stakes of all sizes.
For a few seconds the wayfarer stood with that tense
stillness which signifies itself to be not the end but
merely the suspension, of a previous motion. Her
attitude was that of a person who listens, either to the
external world of sound, or to the imagined discourse of
thought. A close criticism might have detected signs
proving that she was intent on the latter alternative.
Moreover, as was shown 